I: "“ Oh , darling , I ’m so remorseful that we did n’t meet your ship ! Eva Litchfield and I were going to be waiting for you with cheers because you ’re home at last , and then Eva could n’t get away . She ’s in the last throes of a book , you know -- or maybe you do n’t know ; you ’ve become an expatriate , have n’t you ? ”" "“ Why do you call it a failure ? ”" "“ Dinah Avery , my good woman , you had best furbish your own ideas -- your recollections -- before swimming out to sea . For swim out to sea you must , and will , before the day is over . ”" "“ Where would that blow have to strike -- the shattering blow , I mean ? ”" "“ Nick ’s coming . He did n’t know you were to be here . He was talking to Eva Litchfield . ”" "“ Ask him and see , ”" "“ He ’ll tell me nothing , ”" "“ I think it ’s rather funny that she married that particular man , ”" "“ Ah that ’s unfair to me , ”" "“ I meant no slur on Eva ; it was n’t necessary to throw me off a track . ”" "“ I wish I knew , ”" "“ can we believe of what people tell us of themselves ? There ’s no compulsion on them to tell the truth -- if they know it . You will have to judge by Eva ’s actions . And the only consistent thing about her -- the only thing running in a straight line dead ahead to a positive aim -- is her work . The quality of her work never fluctuates ; the quality of her social ambition , and the ambition , if one might so call it , of her heart , is influenced to an extraordinary degree by the subject matter of her books . Did you ever notice that she writes only of people living , with propriety , in old Georgian houses ? There you are , ”" "“ She writes her Georgian house , and then wishes with all her heart to live in it . ”" "“ She reverses the custom about her cake : when she gets it she does n’t wish to eat it because no longer does she understand why in the first place she wanted it . ”" "“ Then what ’s the answer ? ”" "“ All I can tell you is : keep your eyes open . Your ears will be filled by your friends . Not long ago , Eva said to me , ‘ Ca n’t you see that his attitude does something to me ? I ’m not by nature a shrew . ’ ‘ Who knows ? ’ I asked her . Have you ever noticed that if you speak personally to her she is startled ? I ’m no chemist . In the course of my education , I detested chemistry . But I happen to think of it : does n’t marriage start combinations bubbling in a retort ? Correct me if my terms are n’t scientific . Fellows who find out all sorts of things about the stars in connection with our souls , not to mention our intestines , make me faintly sick . Well , then , my dear Dinah , it ’s conceivable that Eva ’s mother - in - law might be heated in a test tube and never bubble into a poison . See what I mean ? ”" "“ Do you mean that Eva has bubbled into a poisonous person ? Because I do n’t believe it . ”" "“ You are against it , then ! ”" "“ It is n’t idle curiosity on my part . ”" "“ She ’s so sweet ! ”" "“ Go on ? You were saying that he dragged her off by force ? ”" "“ In the line of polished pushing . I rather suspect that he gave away his underlying motive in what he said to her as he held her wrap . She had been protesting that what she needed was contact with other writers , and he said : ‘ I ’m jealous of everything . I ’m jealous of the sky that looks down on you . I ’m jealous of the air that blows on your cheek . ’ I had hopes of him ; it occurred to me that , with this line , he might come far enough to really appreciate Eva ’s own unerring selection of the right word -- unless she ’s telling her troubles with him : then , you would be surprised to find out how disgustingly sentimental she is . She told me of some love passages between them . She will of course tell you . But she may tell you other passages , and this was so amusing . She said she went to his study to see if he was angry -- she had probably been outrageous to the poor devil -- and she said he was put out because she then jumped up from his ardent caresses to answer the telephone . She was genuinely astonished at his irritation . Women act like gadflies : they never let a man alone when he is irritated . She appears to have come back at it , standing and simply smiling . He tried to hold out -- must have had some lurking idea of teaching her a lesson ; but she assures me that at the touch of her he always loses his head . And when he gasped -- silly of him , where it ’s a question of Eva -- that she must love him always , she merely said that his workroom was so untidy . She told me this because she was scoring a point against him : he had drawn a mark on her brow with a stick of charcoal and said that she could never get away from his brand -- that she belonged to him . Being Eva , she took this badly ; she said , ‘ You ca n’t shackle my mind ! You ca n’t put your mark on my brain ! ’ It appears that as they were hotly arguing this , the telephone rang again , and she rushed away to answer it . ”" "“ If he does n’t understand Eva better than to even play at branding her---- ! ”" "“ I have no use for women in fact , although theoretically I admire the pretty dears . Eva did n’t see , as you do n’t see , how amusing it is that for the second time she outraged him by rushing to answer the telephone . ”" "“ Mrs. Van Suydam ’s composure is the sum of her sense of what is due her position multiplied by her inflexible will . You ’ll find that Eva appreciates her ; I ’ve always felt that her admiration for the mother had much to do with her falling in love with the son . She met Mrs. Van Suydam at the critical moment . She met her the day the chap asked her to marry him . ”" "“ How can you know ? ”" "“ We all know , ”" "“ It happened the day that you , in a spirit of mistaken decency , left a tea at the Savoy Plaza . Never , my dear Dinah , leave a splendid scene because of a feeling for what is right . ”" "“ She seemed a tragic sight , ”" "“ Eva ? ”" "“ The old lady . She was having a terrible time controlling herself , you know . ”" "“ That ’s what made it such a magnificent scene . Those old girls were taught self - control at the proper boarding schools . And when she sees fit she can defend herself . The old lady needs no help from the itinerant author . Oh , I ’ve been hanging around her whenever I found an opportunity ! ”" "“ I assure you that she does n’t feel a whit humbled in presence of our various names and fames . Her pleasure in identifying those of us whose photographs she ’s seen appended to book reviews is almost sadistic . She ’s long since recovered the balance that you feared to see her throw overboard . She seems to think that our pictures had n’t prepared her for the truth . Once upon a time , when I was hanging on her words , she said loftily : ‘ And who , pray , is that strange woman with a face like a mask ? ’ She graciously assisted me in identifying the lady with ‘ Ah I do n’t wonder you are at a loss ! They all wear masks , these celebrities . ’ The term she so derisively threw at us seemed to taste bad ; only her famous self - control prevented her making a face . She was , at the time , attentively regarding a pale poet who looked , if the truth must be told , half drowned , and at Molly Underhill who has , as we know , an eye that is lewd in its open questing . She said ‘ Humph ! Indeed ! All diseased , I fear . It is a disease , this writing of books . ’ You ’ll notice that she seldom abbreviates her words . There ’s nothing slovenly about her . ”" "“ She took her son home ? ”" "“ The truth is , I do n’t wish to discuss Eva Litchfield , who is a friend of mine . ”" "“ Then that should enable you to guess at the character of loyalty , ”" "“ How do you know ? ”" "“ I still do n’t see---- ”" "“ I ’m not , after all , a New Yorker . ”" "“ Ruin his work ? ”" "“ You see , Mrs. Avery , Nick is his mother ’s only child ; he ’ll have enough money . And Mrs. Van Suydam -- she ’s old - fashioned , I ’ve heard my father call her -- she wanted him to do as the old codgers had always done -- settle down to manage the estate , and all that . And I must say , ”" "“ that it ’s a policy that ’s worked to advantage in lots of cases , here in New York . ”" "“ How does it feel to be a New Yorker ? ”" "“ Did you ever read Genesis ? ”" "“ One must joke , ”" "“ Old girl , you ’ve got to understand . You ’ve got to understand the two sides ; for do n’t you always drag in that there are two sides ? There ’s the side of Eva , and there ’s the side of the Van Suydams : there ’s the side of us , and there ’s the side of New York . You might start -- by way of a drastic change!--by understanding yourself . Why -- for instance -- are you about to be detestable to this good - natured young woman ? Is it because you ’re envious of her security ? She gets that security from having always kept in touch with her home . You could have stayed at home ; Eva could have stayed at home : your precious crowd could have stayed at home . Why did n’t you ? ”" "“ Did I rush you too fast ? ”" "“ Yes ! ”" "“ Why would she find it necessary to say that to him ? Does n’t he grasp it that there ’s such a thing as the privacy of work ? ”" "“ Laugh at it , you fool ! ”" "“ Was she working ? ”" "“ I told you there would be no squabble . Nick ’s loony over her . If I had a wife who did n’t so much as turn her head to speak to me when I went to her room , I ’d give her a dose of her own medicine . ”" "“ I should like to know what he did ? ”" "“ That ’s the point you were thinking of making , was n’t it ? What did he do ? ”" "“ He went over and kissed the nape of her neck , ”" "“ She knows it . She ’s wise . Those tea roses she has around her study are becoming to her . But she is a strange woman : she gets the roses because they are so becoming to her , and then she does n’t play up to them ; she picks up papers from her desk and frowns and pretends she does n’t hear a word you say . ”" "“ She probably does n’t , ”" "“ Look here , you two : you will have to make up your minds to it . Your friend has married a creature of mist and cobwebs , an-- ”" "blankness--“an enchantress who throws spells and does n’t take part in what her spells bring about . ”" "“ I was n’t here , ”" "“ but presumably she was in love with him . ”" "“ Now , Mrs. Avery-- ”" "explain--“I did n’t mean-- Of course she had something to see him about . She told Nick that the Wickershams had telephoned for them to come around after dinner and talk . ”" "“ Oh , well ! What then ? ”" "“ Nick said ‘ Why ? ’ I wish you could have seen how surprised she was ! ‘ To talk , of course , ’ she said . And he said ‘ What ’s the use of that ? ’ And that was when I fancied that Gertie was right and that they were about to blow up . The funny thing is , that you can understand every word she says when she ’s rattling like machine gun fire . She began to say , over and over like a mechanical doll , ‘ Why ? Why ? Why ? ’ She told him flatly that she was a public character and owed a duty to society -- to show up , I took it she meant . And she called poor old Nick ’s attention to the fact that it did n’t matter whether or not he showed up in public , because no one knew who put up a building . ”" "“ Where was the other man while this went on ? ”" "“ Oh , nonsense ! ”" "“ What is the matter with you people ? Is he to be allowed to say what he pleases and she to be muzzled ? ”" "“ Now , look here -- be reasonable . Be fair -- if you can , to Eva . Are n’t you fond of parties ? ”" "“ How do you know he is ? ”" "“ Aha ! ”" "“ Considering that they are distinguished men and women---- ”" "“ I did n’t know she felt that way about that bounder Mapes . How could he affect her ? It seemed to me that it was Eva who knocked her breath out . I remember I came up and told her that Nick was coming . I explained that he had n’t known she was there because he was talking to Eva Litchfield . And she looked dashed , to me . I mean , the name , Eva Litchfield , seemed to do something to her . I give you my word , she almost jumped ! ”" "“ Did Mrs. Van Suydam look at Eva through that _ lorgnette _ ? ”" "“ Ah poor Eva ! ”" "“ This is a footless discussion . And here ’s my street . Goodbye . ”" "“ Poor Eva ! For of course you are talking about Eva ? ”" "“ I do n’t agree with you . ”" "“ At this rate , I ’ll know all by the end of the day . ”" "“ I mean this : since I landed this morning I ’ve heard talk about Eva on all sides , from every source , and with various interpretations put upon her simplest act . Now , there ’s something I want to know : why ? ”" "“ I think he sounds rather attractive . ”" "“ And then ? ”" "“ Look here , my girl , ”" "“ why ca n’t you make up your mind that an American is never happy ? We ’re a chronically dissatisfied race . You know that if any of us were happy we ’d lose our celebrated feverish energy -- we’d not be forced by a substratum of uneasiness to push ourselves -- push , push , push ourselves -- to an end that often we ca n’t see . It ’s our dissatisfaction with life that makes us push . It is n’t going to injure Eva ’s work , that she ’s unhappily married -- if she is . ”" "“ Have you ever thought , Dinah darling , of using yourself in a novel ? But of course you would n’t use what really counts ; no woman would . ”" "“ Shall we stop this ? I ’m sick and tired of talking about Eva . ”" "“ It ’s all too much . I can sort out some points , but not so many . Everyone of you has a different impression of everyone of -- of -- suppose we call them Eva and her opponents ? And what you ’ve been half - way telling is as jumbled as that statement of mine , and my mind is as jumbled as my statement , and -- there you are ! ”" "“ She says , in extenuation of her irritation with him , that her husband has a trick of being verbally frolicsome , and it upsets her . Yet she was upset when , in the days immediately following their marriage , he insisted on making love to her whenever he caught sight of her . She told us , at the time , that the love - making made her fractious because it got in the way of her work . The truth is , she wants him to be always on tap , in a way of speaking : ready to follow her lead , turning on the flow of his adoration and turning it off as she indicates . But mainly , I believe , she objects to his being mentally frolicsome about things that she has said and done . She has a curious lack of all sense of proportion . ”" "“ Do you know , Dinah , I think you wo n’t find her changed in any particular by this experiment . He -- Van Suydam -- is himself doing all the changing . ”" "“ She has , absolutely , the correct objectiveness of the creative worker . ”" "“ You think , then , that we ’d all be better off at home ? ”" "“ I ’d give a lot to know what you really think . After all , I am trying to form a conclusion . ”" "“ Oh , in the way of her appearance , and also in the way of her books , which you must acknowledge one would n’t expect from so lovely a woman . London takes the position that they are fine enough to have been written by an ugly woman . ”" "“ You ’ve been insinuating , and have told nothing -- which , after all , I remember to be characteristic of you . Come out with it . ”" "“ Oh , I ’m not going to tell her what you say . ”" "“ How strange it is , that I did n’t notice silence , abroad . ”" "“ I never saw you before , and I have n’t the least idea who you are , but I feel sure you ’re famous . I came down here because I was told that I ’d see all the famous people . Damn it ! ”" "“ I insist that you ’re famous ! And if you ai n’t , then show me one of ’em ? I came down here to look at celebrated persons . Show me the celebrated persons , will you , my good creature ? ”" "“ What ’s it from ? ”" "“ She looks wretchedly , ”" "“ Eva ’s husband , I daresay you mean me to infer ? ”" "“ Snap out of it , you hypocrite ! ”" "“ You have every intention of hanging around Eva , of questioning , listening , and otherwise poking your nose -- which Molly is right in dubbing a misfit -- into things that are in no way your business , until you get at the bottom of this marriage . Do n’t cavil at the right of others to do likewise . ”" "“ Why do n’t you keep away from her ? She ’s incapable of seeing through you . ”" "“ I intend to see her tomorrow ; and I ’ll find out for myself these equivocal secrets at which all of you hint . If there ’s anything I detest-- ”" "him--“it ’s to be played ! ”" "“ Try to be fair , old girl , ”" "“ Try to come to conclusions as a man would , personal likes and dislikes aside . ”" "“ Be as fair as men tell us they are . ”" "“ You know , and I know , that very deliberately you ’ve confused the state of affairs , so that when I see Eva tomorrow -- and I ’ve every intention of seeing her as soon as I decently can , and shall tell her everything you ’ve said---- ”" "“ Friends ? ”" "“ Friends , Iago ? ”" "“ She ’s changed , then ? ”" "“ things , ”" "“ Brains directed to a worthy end -- personalities turned into the service of our country---- ”" "“ Do you realize that in every case of a President of the United States being assassinated , it was inspired by the Pope ? ”" "“ It seems we ’ve got to get it over with . ”" "“ Outside of her appearance , people would stare at Eva , ”" "“ Do please remember that she ’s tremendously well known . Her name is known , but also her face . ”" "“ He was roaring to his own public , which is his intelligence , I daresay , ”" "“ To their friends , yes . Might n’t it have been that Eva felt you were n’t friends ? ”" "“ And Eva has the sunny rooms ? ”" "“ She has , Mrs. Avery . ”" "“ She had n’t time to stop and think what was good for him . ”" "“ Eva is a very hard worker , and sometimes she seems much more heedless than in her heart she is . ”" "“ Do you think they have a chance on earth ? ”" "“ With every acquaintance taking a hand , they are , of course , heading for the rocks . ”" "“ If you mean , that he ’s in love with her , ”" "“ he is eating too many muffins for that state of mind . ”" "“ Thank you for telling me . ”" "“ Oh-- ”" "worth--“there are always two sides , are n’t there ? ”" "“ After all , ”" "“ I ’ve heard the other side of it . ”" "“ Funny ? It did n’t impress me as being in the least amusing . ”" "“ The door towards the back , Miss Dinah , ”" "“ H - m - m , ”" "“ Over the telephone , you did n’t impress me as feeling so strongly about seeing me . ”" "“ Are n’t you happy with him ? ”" "“ That is one of the difficulties . He ’s lost , I fear , the abstraction of his ideas . ”" "“ How can anyone hold an abstract idea while you are around ? ”" "“ I should inspire them . ”" "“ My dear , ”" "“ you have a way of shattering people . You have a trick of making everyone feel inferior to you . ”" "“ I fixed up a workroom for him , ”" "“ And I let him keep it as grimy with charcoal dust as he wishes . He ’s comfortably slouchy , and agreeably smutty , and this should please him , I ’m sure . I do n’t think men care how they look when they work : as I do , and as I ’m sure you do . ”" "“ But he breaks in on me when I ’m working . ”" "“ Do you break in on him when he ’s working ? ”" "“ We ’ve had some queer love - making in that horribly ugly room . ”" "“ What do you want , if we come down to it ? Why on earth did n’t you marry Gertrude Cuyler ? She would n’t have objected to your kisses when her mind was at work , because she has n’t a mind . ”" "“ He looks ! He , merely , looks ! ”" "“ He should take me by my back hair and sling me around . ”" "“ You know how I adore terriers ? ”" "“ Why do you think that ? How-- ”" "witheringly--“how could anyone be jealous of Spence ? ”" "“ I know he is , ”" "“ because he is forever saying he is n’t . But that is n’t of the slightest importance ; why did you take me up on it ? I was going to tell you about the prophets crying in the wilderness ‘ Repent ye ! ’ Nick ’s crowd make the summer and the winter noisy with their clamour . ”" "“ You do n’t think , then , that our crowd cry in the wilderness ? ”" "“ Ah you are hopeless ! ”" "“ You were going to tell me of some interference on the part of -- which of your husband ’s friends was it ? ”" "“ What did you hear ? ”" "“ So that has come up ! ”" "“ I ’ve been wondering when it would . ”" "“ How about this matter of a child ? ”" "“ Had you no remorse at leaving him in a caldron ? ”" "“ Are you putting this into his mouth ? ”" "“ Tell me this : is he still in love with you ? ”" "“ I ’m sorry , ”" "“ I ’m making no mystery of it . But I am getting slants -- oh , very different ones , I assure you!--on practically everything you ’ve done since your marriage ; I have n’t seen one person yet who has n’t at once given their version . ”" "“ Oh , do n’t ! I ’m crazy to hear what you noticed at the parties and the like . You have no idea how fascinating it is , to get all the sides of the prism . ”" "“ And besides , ”" "“ they ca n’t know what I mean to tell you . Wait and see ! I was nervous about that reception , for I did n’t know how the two crowds -- Nick ’s and mine -- would get on with each other . And-- ”" "smile--“I daresay I wanted to make a smashing impression on Nick ’s crowd . And Nick made me frantic by continuing to tell me not to be nervous . I ’ll not deny that I was hateful . I loitered upstairs in the dressing - room until he came for me ; and he began running down the stairs , holding on to my arm ; and he said he was sorry I slipped , but that he had forgotten I had not run , and slid , down those stairs since I was born . He may not have intended it , but he was superior about it . Of course I was furious ; and I said I had forgotten to powder my nose and went back to the dressing - room . ”" "“ Childish , was n’t it ? ”" "“ Um - m - m. I ’m not so sure . I did deeply resent his manner . Looking back on it , I believe it was his own nervousness . He was more afraid of his mother ’s scolding the nearer he got to it ; and he glowered , and muttered at me to know if I did n’t realize that it was unpardonably rude to be late at a reception given for one . He said those things were n’t done , amongst his mother ’s friends . What would you have said to that ? I said ‘ I ’m accustomed to doing as I see fit and letting people wait for me . ’ I was sure he ’d take it , and that his mother would n’t . And , ”" "“ he laughed at me ! Quite gaily laughed at me ! He got over his bad temper , and stood on the stairs laughing at me . He said ‘ Wait until you see them ! Look here , my dear : they have n’t the remotest-- ’ Of course I knew what he had intended saying . He had been about to say that those frumps had never heard of me until I married him . And after meeting them -- and having them try to run my life for me , with the coolest assumption of omniscience -- I can believe it . Their ignorance , my dear , of what goes on in the world---- ! Well : I lifted my eyebrows . But he whispered to me ‘ Be a good girl , wo n’t you ? And look perfectly beautiful , for my sake ? ’ And I knew that he was dreading what they would say about me . ”" "“ It must be because he is , undoubtedly , old - fashioned . It sticks in his craw , one might say , that his wife works along a line quite independent of him , ”" "“ Oh , Eva ! Eva ! ”" "“ Why not ? Do n’t you think it was the kind thing to do ? ”" "“ Kind ? ”" "“ Nick is simple , sometimes . He began on a certain shame that he had got up over it ; and naturally I realized how painful it would be if he acknowledged all of it -- I had an idea that he ’d brood over it -- so I brought the talk to an end . He gave every evidence , besides , of getting hateful about it ; for he said something about it not being so bad with my work . ‘ With your flow of words -- your beloved words -- what ’s to prevent your turning them loose on your book -- finishing your book ? ’ He said that when a man wanted to build the greatest building of a great city , and the thing escaped , the fantastic idea was always beyond him because at the front of the poor man ’s head was trouble and on the vision of the poor man ’s strained imagination were the knocks of fortune : what was a man to do , in such case ? The Devil , he reminded me , had helped the architect who designed the Cologne Cathedral ; but the devils who were poking their fingers in this pie were not helpful visitants . He overlooked , you see , the self - evident fact that his mother ’s friends are the bad visitants . ”" "“ He was appealing to you for sympathy . You wanted his understanding of the problems -- the agonies -- of your work , and he asked you to consider his problem . Do n’t you feel this ? ”" "“ He wanted to say ‘ Will you kindly , mercifully , put it into words -- say , out loud , what you think of my work , of my potential ability to do great work ? ’ ”" "“ He might merely be reticent , ”" "“ You must often have rubbed it in on him that you do n’t think much of his ability . ”" "“ Why was n’t it sufficient ? ”" "“ You ’re wrong . I understand only too well . ”" "“ You do n’t want love ; you want adoration -- little Bodhisattvas sitting at your feet . ”" "“ I scarcely know him , ”" "“ Why should n’t he laugh ? ”" "“ What had you said , to make him laugh ? ”" "“ No wonder he laughed , ”" "“ Poor man ! ”" "“ Oh -- let ’s drop it , Eva ; shall we ? Why should we quarrel over it ? ”" "“ You mean , because I do n’t like a long - winded talk over the telephone ? ”" "“ What did you mean about evil consequences resulting from the New Year ’s Eve parties ? ”" "“ At what part of the evening did he change his mind , Eva ? Because I remember that on the way to one or the other of the orgies I overheard him say to you that my head was too big . ”" "“ I meant her skull , ”" "“ It was a joke , ”" "“ Trying to get rid of him ? ”" "“ He may perhaps be a fool ? ”" "“ I ’m leaving you , ”" "“ And what ’s the matter with that ? What ’s wrong with Dutchmen ? Who started this city , I ’d like to know , if not Dutchmen ? ”" "“ James Pomeroy would say that living on the thirtieth floor is making a queer bird out of you , Dinah Avery . Get back to normal and hurry to the next party . ”" "“ Say , listen ! It may be Noo Year , an ’ de cops is slack fur de night ; but I ai n’t one er youse souses what gits let off . I got my fam’ly ter t’ink about . ”" "“ Of course you did , ”" "“ The thing to find out is what you may have neglected to tell him . ”" "“ I never saw such an amazing youth as this stage decorator chap ! Look here , young Guy -- were your parents Little People ? ”" "“ It ’s the New Year already ! Listen ! ”" "“ I do feel like the wrath of God . I know now why men pulling out of a spree just pitch in and get drunk all over again . ”" "“ Oh -- hell ! ”" "“ I ’m apologizing , ”" "“ For what ? ”" "“ Yancey says I tickled you , down at our party , ”" "“ Yancey says she never saw anything so disgusting . She says you howled , and rolled up in a ball . ”" "“ Why should n’t I roll up in a ball ? I happen to be ticklish . ”" "“ I do n’t remember a thing about it . ”" "“ The point is , I do n’t see why in the mischief I wanted to tickle you . I wish I could understand how I came to do it . It never entered my head to want to do it . ”" "“ If it were only a chair that had been wrecked on the beach this night---- ! ”" "“ This is how we keep it up . Do n’t you see that we ca n’t help it ? Why , then , come down hard on Eva ? ”" "“ I ca n’t follow out even a feeble thought . ”" "“ What are your secret sins ? They must be black , for I ’ve never caught you out in one . ”" "“ I might as well go too , ”" "“ I prefer not to say . ”" "“ I insist on speaking to the young man who changed my commas in my last book . ”" "“ She asked me here . She said she simply had to speak to me . ”" "“ She asked me here . She said she simply had to see me . ”" "“ You look like a meditative kitten . Have you been saying to yourself that I am a lazy devil ? But I ’ve always found late afternoon in New York a maddening time of day . I want to hurry home , and call out through the darkening house ‘ Where are you , Eva ? ’ And Eva goes to teas , at this eerie hour . If I do n’t go with her , I am assailed by loneliness . Dark , in the street outside . You know how it looks , down there , very late in the afternoon ; I called your attention to it , the last time you were down . ”" "“ You like to stay at home when you ’re not working . But we reverse it , you see ; we are obliged to reverse it : we stay at home when we work . ”" "“ As to work -- I spent a large part of today leaning out my office window and contemplating the city . Now , do n’t , please , say what Eva would promptly say to confound me -- that I had led her to believe I worked while at my office . There are times when a man must dream ; and one dreams in the most tranquil spot . I would fulfill a better purpose if I sat in the park , or on Riverside , and absorbed the city rearing itself above me ; but by doing this wise thing I should be flying in the face of the convention that a business man is always busy . A man , if a proper fellow , sits behind his desk continuously , a portentous scowl on his face and in his heart a mad desire to get off and go fishing . He ’s the typical business magnate : the scowl tells you so . Always on the job -- a man to be depended on . ”" "“ At the last tea at which we met , I believe I remember Florence Quincy at the wailing wall : ‘ Have n’t I the right to my privacy ? Have n’t I the right to the time to work ? ’ ”" "“ Oh -- I mean , unconsciously so . ”" "“ Do you never weary of it ? ”" "“ Your private lives , in short , ”" "“ are lived in the midst of turmoil ? ”" "“ You are in league with Mattie , then ? ”" "“ She has a good heart ! The things she does -- Mattie knows about them ; Mattie can tell you---- ”" "“ Even her imperfections are lovable . ”" "“ After she went away for the first summer of our married life , ”" "“ she wrote me that at first she could n’t bear to look at her typewriter because it had come between us , you might say . ”" "“ Lock me up , if I suggest going out ? ”" "“ She does n’t , ”" "“ She put it down to a real reversal of values . She thinks that maybe she will get her bearings ; and maybe not . She said she had found out that one ca n’t force issues . ”" "“ She said -- it ’s so foolish to repeat it!--but she did say that she had about found that her need for me was not so much---- I do feel that I ’m drivelling ! ”" "“ Go on , ”" "“ I ’m tremendously interested . And do remember that I ’ve known Eva longer than have you . ”" "“ You know , then , how carefully she chooses her words -- it ’s almost as if she had got them on paper , she ’s so sure -- so that what she says has an added weight of truth ? She said ‘ I found out , lately , that my need for you is not so much physical as it ’s spiritual . ’ ”" "“ From Eva ? Undoubtedly . ”" "“ I did n’t think of it in that way , ”" "“ I could think of nothing besides what I put to her -- a hot demand to know what the devil she meant . I do feel apologetic for telling you this , ”" "“ I must be catching your literary urge to tell all . ”" "“ I ’ve been away so long , ”" "“ that I myself know little to tell , and possibly -- undoubtedly -- should tell it if I had any store of knowledge . But , seriously , I am fond of Eva ; and I want to hear everything that you ’re willing to tell me . ”" "“ What she said next is really my reason for bringing up the subject . I ’m aware that you ’re a friend of hers , and I feel on my own part that you can be trusted . ”" "“ She replied in a way that was no explanation . She said ‘ The sad part of it is , Nick , that no matter what happens everyone will be sorry for you . No one will be sorry for me . And yet , it seems to me that somebody should be able to see my side of it . Somebody should be sorry for me . It ’s very little to ask -- that someone be sorry for me . ’ I ’m sure that this is , word for word , what she said ; it made such a peculiar impression on me that I ca n’t forget it . Her side of -- what ? ”" "“ Then , if you do n’t want me , what ’s the matter with me ? ”" "“ You will see , in a minute , that I went into telling you this rigmarole because it bears on her as yet unspoken wishes for the summer . You see , I shouted at her . There are times when she makes a fellow feel that there ’s nothing left but to shout at her . She has that dear little smile that ’s the most withdrawn thing in the world . I think-- ”" "it--“that if once I brought myself to the pitch of shaking the breath out of her I ’d get my bearings . And at the present time , I assure you , I am away off in my calculations . ”" "“ What did she say when you shouted at her ? ”" "“ She withdrew ! ”" "“ And then she announced , as a result of her cogitation , that she did n’t really believe she wanted a man at all . You see ? She started in by almost making love , and she swung around to a statement like that -- to her husband ! The fact , ”" "“ that I fail to understand a thing about her is a constant fillip . I mean , I am crazy over her . I never saw her equal . ”" "“ You ca n’t get around it that she is Eva Litchfield . ”" "“ Which does n’t mean a thing , ”" "“ I do n’t stop to remember that she has sense . In fact , I often doubt that she has . ”" "“ You do n’t see that side of her ? ”" "“ Do you ? ”" "“ Yes . How can you fail to see it ? ”" "“ I was -- I think , at any rate , that I was -- going to tell you how I came to my suspicion that she ’s planning something in the way of running off again , this summer . And I wanted to ask if you could n’t arrange to go to whatever place she selects ? ”" "“ Exactly ! She ’s a devastating influence on another ’s work . ”" "“ You ’ve felt this ? ”" "“ She said that she was so crowded in her life -- she had so little room in which to work . This was , simply , making excuses -- laying the groundwork of her plan , whatever it may be . She said that a man and his claims -- his mere presence in the house -- held her down , cramping her spirit , injuring her work . If she had wings , she said -- and she acknowledged that possibly she had n’t ; she said she had n’t had a fair chance to see if they would grow -- the claims of a man would clip them . This was ingratitude , Dinah . I make myself scarce around the house when she ’s working . And besides , all day I ’m at my office . I called her attention to this . ”" "“ Shouting ? ”" "“ I did . She came back at me , however : she said that I was in the air around her . That she knew I was in existence . That this crowded her -- that I was in existence ! ”" "“ I said , to this , that I ’d be damned if I believed she knew what she wanted out of life . And I asked her , point - blank , what she did want . ”" "“ You know how she gets you when you ’re angriest ? With just one little childlike word ? She said ‘ Wings ! ’ I assure you , I melted ! ”" "“ Suppose I came at you with a remark on the order of these you ’ve been throwing at my head ? ”" "“ How could you have forgotten that the moon wanes , and is cold and not to be counted on to warm the house ? ”" "“ We are all as selfish as we can be , ”" "“ I ’m so selfish that , even after your appeal , I still refuse absolutely to go with Eva this summer . And , if you are looking for a reason , what you ’ve just said will provide you with one . Eva , without meaning to do so , tries that out on everyone . ”" "“ Goodbye , ”" "“ Goodbye , ”" "“ Oh , do you really think it a nice party ? Oh , how good you are to me ! ”" "“ This woman will have us telling the worst about ourselves . We ’ll do it anyway ; we ’re proud of the worst in ourselves . ”" "“ Do you like to peer and pry into the insides of those whom you call friends ? I ask in no spirit of censure . But I ’m interested in the workings of the mind of a realist . Why do you realists go the whole way ? You may be said to tell all about your hero ’s toe nails . It ’s so disgusting . Who cares about toe nails ? Eva , thank God , is not a realist . ”" "“ Oh -- by the way-- ”" "“ She never has her feet on the ground . Bear that in mind . She will write nothing raw . She dislikes bawdy words . ”" "“ Your husband is waiting for you . I think he ’s ready to go home . ”" "“ Have you thought about this room ? It is packed , I ’m feeling , with evil influences . ”" "“ It’s -- it’s -- bad . The room itself . The city outside the room . Oh -- the whole thing , ”" "“ I go through this year after year , agreeing with everyone because it ’s less troublesome than to hold opposite views . There ’s so much talk , if one does n’t agree . ”" "“ Help me out ? Help me out , Dinah , for the love of God ? I ca n’t stand this ! ”" "“ Not the kind of people to whom I ’m accustomed . ”" "“ What could you have said to her before we started ? You’ve -- actually -- hurt her feelings . ”" "“ How can you expect me to understand , properly to sympathize , or even to advise -- as I do really make out that you wish me to do -- if I ’m not posted ? ”" "“ Come ! ”" "“ This is getting you nowhere . ”" "“ Stop that ! You ’re raving . ”" "“ Keep quiet , ”" "“ They are joking , and you are n’t . ”" "“ What ’s the matter ? ”" "“ What ’s the matter with you ? ”" "“ You really should take more care of yourself . You ’ll be going off in your looks . ”" "“ Why do we all hang together , do you suppose ? Are we afraid to be alone ? Tell me , Eva : are you afraid of loneliness because of what you might dig out of the bottom of your heart ? ”" "“ Cheer up , ”" "“ you ’ve no troubles . ”" "“ But do n’t tell them , anyway . I ’m not equal to hearing troubles . ”" "“ Besides , do you know that there was something indecent in what you said ? Do n’t let a tendency to rawness get the better of you , Dinah . It ’s of the crystalline purity of unspoken thoughts that art is made . ”" "“ Eva , you are perfectly delicious , and unexpected , and so provoking that I often wonder how a man can live with you without blowing his brains out ! ”" "“ I ’m in no mood for that sort of thing . You should know it without my telling you . ”" "“ Why not move around and show yourself , Miss Litchfield ? ”" "“ Do n’t mind , Eva ! ”" "“ She looks very strange . She ’s apt to do anything . ”" "“ Well , ”" "“ I ’m glad you are back , and all that : consider it said : but what in the name of peace have you to tell that could not have waited for a more merciful day ? ”" "“ We shall come to that later . I want to tell you how inconsistent Nick was about what he calls my love of money . Dinah , he has never been poor ; he does n’t know what it is to want to be certain that one will never again be poor . I knew what was the matter with him , although he did n’t know what was the matter with me . He had to have an interval in which to again enclose against me all of his mother ’s scorn , all of his mother ’s resentment , of the blatant wealth of the present New York . Oh , yes : I ’ve been studying Nick , as I would study a character for a novel : there is every reason , now , why I should understand all his quirks and fancies . Not for the first time , he was wondering why I alone have the power to rouse him to this admiration of his mother ’s tenets . And I saw his wonder , and his own -- in spite of himself -- resentment of me . ”" "“ You are glad of something else , ”" "“ What is it ? ”" "“ Well , then -- if you will have it -- I am going to have a child ! ”" "“ How can anyone think , in New York ? If it were just quieter , I could tell you what I feel about it , Eva . ”" "“ And I could also try to get at how you feel about it . ”" "“ That ’s what I was saying , ”" "“ There ’s a numbness that drops on me , when the windows are open and noise pours in over me ; and then I can neither think nor feel . But I do know that I am glad . I think it is the best thing for you . ”" "“ Did you say this to Nicholas ? ”" "“ He might have felt -- you describe him as being very moved -- well , then , he might have felt that words can do nothing , when a man ’s soul is touched . ”" "“ Yes , I think that was the way he felt about it . And besides , the poor darling was never good at saying things . He has no command over words . ”" "“ There ’s the sound of conjugal home life ! ”" "“ I hope my little woman is taking good care of herself ? ”" "“ Go on ; tell me the rest ? ”" "“ From what ? ”" "“ What of it ? ”" "“ We ’re vultures , are n’t we ? We pick bones . I ’m sick of it -- sometimes . ”" "“ Rhapsody in Blue . ”" "“ I wo n’t talk . I wo n’t speak another word from the real inside . ”" "“ I ’ve been working it out -- what we all need ; and it looks as if it of course has to turn us into hell cats -- if we do it . ”" "“ In order to do creative work one must have -- and preserve at all costs , even to acting as a slow poison on those who come in contact with us -- the heart of fire and the brain of ice . That ’s the working combination . ”" "“ Ah you frighten me ! ”" "“ You frighten me ! What are you trying to do to her ? You are revolting ! ”" "“ What a friend you are ! ”" "“ You are nice , Eva , ”" "“ you ’re nice ! ”" "“ I knew , all along , that the outrageous summer before last was an omen . Eva , the brassy sky was a warning ! ”" "“ The stock market crash . ”" "“ Have you sensibility ? ”" "“ Not that sort , ”" "“ But I want to tell you that I have looked forward more than you may surmise : what do you think I did with the money the last book brought me ? I did n’t spend it ; I went back to first principles , and while I did n’t hide it in my stocking I did the modern equivalent : I put it in a bank ! Oh , I ’m safe ! I ’m safe ! ”" "“ Gussie always did talk too much , Tilly , as I am forever telling her . ”" "“ I see no reason for staying . Do come away ? Why should you subject yourself to unpleasantness ? ”" "“ Did you ever talk to her -- really talk to her ? ”" "“ Face facts ! We are , none of us , any good . What is friendship , when one writes novels ? ”" "“ You mean that it would be my duty to love him more than I love myself ? It ’s possibly a splendid thing to love from a sense of duty ; but is it a compliment ? ”" "“ I ’m very sorry that I was , in a way , forced to overhear what you said . But Eva must have forgotten that she asked me to wait over by the window . ”" "“ Miss Eva Litchfield , ”" "“ I ’m sure she ’s here . Suppose you go and find out ? ”" "“ I forgot : I ’m asking for Mrs. Nicholas Van Suydam . ”" "“ I allude , ”" "“ to the financial news of the day . ”" "“ I do n’t , ”" "“ keep up with it . ”" "“ We ’ll go together , ”" "“ Listen to reason . I told you all of this , today , and you did n’t then lose your head . ”" "“ If you will kindly leave us , I can manage Eva . ”" "“ Ca n’t you let her alone ? She ’d forgotten it . ”" "“ This is , then , one of your evenings in the grand manner , ”" "“ I asked you a simple question : what ’s doing ? ”" "“ There ’s something in the air tonight -- something bad ! ”" "“ Like the gods . ”" "“ sometimes going to write because they must express themselves . ”" "“ When we ’re married , Janny , we can have these people at our home . ”" "“ You do n’t know it , Janny , but I ’m not a brute . I know all about it , loveliest ! I ’m not going to scold you . I ’ve done it myself , you see . ”" "“ Carouse around a bit ? You do n’t think a chap can reach my age without having racketed around town ; do you ? ”" "“ Go on ! ”" "“ Do it ! You have n’t the idea that I care if you bash my head in , have you ? ”" "“ Lor ! ”" "“ I ’m used ter ladies bustin ’ outer that there house ! I knows , when I sees ’em atearin ’ for the street , I better git ’em a taxi in a jiffy . ”" "“ It pays ter be a watchman , on some blocks of this here town . You know this town well , ladies ? ”" "“ No , I wo n’t ! ”" "“ I ’m glad of it ! ”" "“ Oh , it ’s merely the times . ”" "“ I was going to bring Molly here tonight -- and her apartment was filled with the police and they held me up and pushed me out . I was going to bring her here tonight . The place was full of policemen . ”" "“ I ’m thankful I ran across you . I wanted to ask if you know what plans Eva is making ? ”" "“ That has a familiar ring ! ”" "“ Ah but she is making plans ! I can see it . And the trouble is that she does n’t say a word about it . She usually talks about whatever is in her head . I wondered if you might n’t know ? ”" "“ You know how she is -- excitable ? She ’s got herself tremendously worked - up over the panic ; and she was already moping over Molly Underhill . ”" "“ I have my own troubles . ”" "“ How is work ? ”" "“ However , ”" "“ she ’s worried because she -- well , then , because she ’s Eva ! She thinks I sha n’t make enough money to keep us out of the poorhouse . I dislike to talk about such matters , Dinah ; but you might put it in her head that she need n’t worry about the poorhouse . We -- my mother and I -- have a policy , as my father had -- he learned it from his father , and so on back -- to hold on to real estate . We ’re strapped , but not smashed . If you could explain this to her ? ”" "“ And , you see , she ’s got it in her head that the falling away of my work is due to a corresponding falling to pieces of my reputation . ”" "“ She was poor , once , ”" "“ before she came to New York . ”" "“ Ah ? ”" "“ I know nothing of that old life before she came to New York . Oh , I mean -- naturally , I know the general outline . But I mean to say -- you people charge on New York , and show your most sparkling side , and we take it for granted , you see , that you were always , and everywhere , brilliant and prosperous and on the crest of the wave . ”" "“ That ’s New York , ”" "“ And then , too , it ’s impossible to think of Eva as ever having passed around the hat , so to speak , ”" "“ The city is in such a blue funk , just now , that it works on her ; of itself , it would frighten her . ”" "“ The poor old town ! The poor bastard ! ”" "“ You people who come into New York are so marvellous ! Such energy ! Such apparent ignorance that you could possibly fail to conquer ! It ’s amazing . I ’ve noticed about Eva that she can and does turn on to her work the full force of her storming rages -- I do n’t mean that in the least the way it sounds , however ; but she does tear around the house and bemoan herself -- well , then , ”" "“ Why should she ? You ’ve just said that you ’re constantly surprised at the way in which her nervous force is made to serve the needs of her work . Why try to reform her ? She knows what she ’s about . ”" "“ We ’re getting at it ! ”" "“ What can you mean ? ”" "“ You should n’t be the one to feel such things . This is your home town . ”" "“ New York does something to us who come here from outside . ”" "“ Maybe I do n’t see , myself . It ’s the result of the weather . It ’s depressing weather . ”" "“ I had feared , you know , that you had got the idea that you were in love with Eva because you were dazzled by the fact of her being , as she undoubtedly is , a famous person . ”" "“ Shut the window in a hurry ! I ’d rather smother . ”" "“ I think she will be in soon , ”" "“ I ’ve been thinking over things , ”" "“ There ’s reason in abundance for Eva being worried , you know . I mean , I know she was very apprehensive about the crashing of banks ; and now that it ’s happened---- ”" "“ My job is to see that she ’s not worried . ”" "“ She sees it all around her , ”" "“ Her friends are worried sick . The town is on the run . ”" "“ New York ? ”" "“ But that ’s only temporary , of course . ”" "“ So nothing can open your eyes ? ”" "“ You think , then , that she is really worried ? What , ”" "“ does she see , then , that would so upset her ? ”" "“ She might have run across what I found myself in the thick of , yesterday , ”" "“ She did n’t , it happens , see this particular thing ; but it is n’t the only shocking sight in town -- your prosperous town ! ”" "“ It would n’t hurt you , to be thrown out to hunt a job for yourself ! ”" "“ Did you never hear of keeping up one ’s courage by making fun ? ”" "“ No , Dinah : I’m -- I’m scared to death . And I ’m frightened over something so much more vital than money , so much more necessary than a job : happiness with one ’s wife . ”" "“ I got the chance to see it , ”" "“ and now I ’d give much if I had n’t . We crowded into a slit of a place , and peeked through a large pane of glass let into the wall . ”" "“ Do n’t make it sound like Alice and the looking - glass , for I do n’t feel whimsical . ”" "“ It was the trying - out of applicants for the job of radio announcer . We looked through the pane of glass as they admitted them one by one , like those hogs that go sliding down a chute at a slaughter house . Only the hogs do n’t realize . And I assure you , Nicholas , that those poor wretches took every conceivable test of their courage . I do n’t doubt but that they were hungry . The people on the street corners , selling apples , have made us all hunger - conscious . ”" "“ Listen , Nicholas ? ”" "“ It would n’t hurt you , ”" "“ Would you believe the cruelty of it ? They gave them , as the ‘ humorous test , ’ that ghastly thing about the man worth while is the man who can smile when everything goes dead wrong ! Are you listening to what I ’m telling you ? ”" "“ It ’s difficult to talk to Eva ; she is n’t logical in her talk . I had all sorts of thoughts on what I ’d say in order to clear things up -- arrive at a good and fair understanding with her ; but , as always , I no longer knew what I had wanted to say when I entered the room . I could think of nothing but plain words , and so I said it outrageously : ‘ It has seemed to me , lately , that we ’re going on the rocks . ’ And she did n’t answer this , naturally . She had tears in her eyes , so she could n’t have been trying to hurt me when she said she wondered why a woman might not claim the right to peace for doing her work . She wondered why it is that only a man may say he will have it -- that only a man may fight for it , kill for it . And I urged her to sit down and try to talk like a sensible woman . And she said that if ever again she had to listen to that God - awful term ‘ sensible woman ’ applied to her she would---- Oh , she left it up in the air what she would do ! ”" "“ So you see it is n’t only her fear about money . We did have this row . ”" "“ She is complex , ”" "“ Her acts are necessarily hard to understand , although I do n’t doubt that they are simple , and above board , if you could get at them . ”" "“ Then what does she think -- feel -- about this Mapes fellow ? ”" "“ This brings us to my self - charge of cruelty . I told her that while we were on the subject I wished to state that her friends took out the greater part of their sensibility in talk ; and she instantly flew at me , although behind her eyes I saw the suspicion she fought down . She said her friends have a great power of belief , a tremendous generosity ; and as to critical taste -- well , then , if their judgments were n’t to be accepted , where were we for a criterion ? I replied to what I saw behind her eyes ; I said she ’d better go in search of Mapes , then -- that as his praise was so whole - hearted a session with him might make her feel better . As for me , I told her , I never got the feeling of sincerity in anything he said . She positively quailed . She might have been seeing a ghost . She begged me not to say such a thing . But I had stopped thinking solely of her . I insisted that he was n’t an honest man , that he had n’t an honest eye , and that anyone could tell by his voice that he was sly . She reminded me that he had nothing to gain . But she was at the moment arguing with her intelligence , I knew , trying to bolster her spirit which might turn to water . I was a cheap fellow to say to her ‘ I have still to discover what he stands to gain ’ . ”" "“ Miss Litchfield in ? ”" "“ You ’ve given up the idea ? ”" "“ Soon after luncheon , ”" "“ After all , I ’m endeavouring to get along myself , you must remember . ”" "“ I ca n’t waste my time this way . A bus ride is outside my schedule . ”" "“ You do as you wish to do , and then you expect your friends to get in on the inevitable scene . ”" "“ You manage it , one way or another , ”" "“ You realize , I trust , that this is the last thing I shall do for you ? ”" "“ It is so to me , also . ”" "“ I do n’t think I understand , ”" "“ Naturally , I know little about it . ”" "“ You are a woman ! You are a woman , too ! And you ’ve been married ! You must have married a man like Nick ! You could understand , if you would ! ”" "“ And what , pray , am I to understand ? I trust that it is n’t a question of a divorce ? ”" "“ Mrs. Van Suydam , how did Eva really die ? ”" "“ I meant , ”" "“ her other death . ”" "“ Her friends , ”" "“ have wondered . You ca n’t be surprised at that . ”" "“ Eva , you ’ve always been so cold . I ’ve never believed that you ’d yielded yourself to me body and soul . Wo n’t you soften just once , and leave me that to remember ? ”" "“ I ’m very sorry I asked . ”" "“ My mother appears to think that you consider me guilty of something dastardly . I ’m not sure that , in her heart , she does n’t agree with you . ”" "“ Eva told me she had written you that she had made up her mind to leave me . ”" "“ It was unnecessary to inform you that I knew -- as things turned out . ”" "“ I came here to tell you that she was about to leave me . ”" "“ The suddenness of it , ”" "“ would have shocked any man , even one who understood Eva . ”" "“ I understood her . ”" "“ She killed something in me . It ’s resurrected every now and then ; but it ’s a ghost . Oh -- I understood her ! ”" "“ Do n’t ! Do n’t ! I do n’t want to hear what you have to say . Why did you come here ? ”" "“ I feel that there ’s a dreadful mistake , somewhere . ”" "“ You knew , did n’t you , that Spencer Mapes followed her to Hollywood ? You knew it all along , did n’t you ? ”" "“ It ’s so plain . And I should n’t have been surprised . ”" "“ I knew that he was out there , and that it had n’t necessarily to do with Eva . Why should n’t he go out there ? What are you driving at ? ”" "“ Perhaps I ’d better take it up with the statement that until the night of her return I did n’t know that she was thinking of leaving me . She had said nothing of the sort in her letters . I was so bucked at her getting back . I had been lonelier than I had realized . She did n’t look well ; said she ’d caught cold on the train , and the change from the warm climate of the Coast was already making it worse . It was horrible weather -- one of those persistent rains when April is cold . The trees were in bud , but they were lashing , I remember , beating against the windowpanes . Strange -- how one remembers things like that . I do n’t believe I can ever again bear to hear branches scraping against windowpanes . Her cheeks were bright red ; and yet she looked exhausted . I suggested telephoning for a doctor , but she said ‘ Do n’t be absurd . I want to talk to you . ’ She came and patted my cheek . You know how she used to say -- in the most impersonal way--‘Darling old Nick ’ ? ”" "“ I never , in the course of our married life , had the conviction of having touched her in the flesh . It used to make me shy with her . And that last night she had a more than ever silvery laugh . I felt as if all my life I must stand a way off from her , looking at her with my arms hanging . It was the swift precision of her reply to what I asked her : ‘ Of course I love you . ’ ”" "“ I find this very difficult . ”" "“ Do n’t tell me -- please do n’t tell me---- ”" "“ I was so glad the surface of her writing - table had been polished for her home - coming ; because she leaned against it : her hands rested on it . She was leaning back against the desk , but her shoulders were thrust forward ; she gave me the impression of being prepared for me to charge at her and therefore in need of solidarity behind her . That room of hers had a glow , had n’t it ? The glow shone on her , and her hair---- ”" "“ She was an unapproachable saint . But a man ca n’t derive solace from the evidence of his eyes . ”" "“ By the way , I noticed that her eyes were extraordinarily brilliant . She never removed them from my face ; they were so still that they were like the eyes of a vision . ”" "“ She wanted help ! ”" "“ Ca n’t you see that she wanted help ? ”" "“ She told you . ”" "“ Not after she had seen you . She might never have told me these details of the break with you . ”" "“ Oh , yes , she would . ”" "“ And do n’t you think , Dinah , that sometimes a merciful lie is the act of a compassionate God ? ”" "“ I ’m trying to make out why you could n’t understand , ”" "“ What did she want ? ”" "“ What under heaven did she want ? ”" "“ She did n’t want me . I could n’t fool myself that she wanted me ; in fact , she said plainly that what she wanted with me was a safe harbour , to which she could set sail when in distress . That ’s not the right thing for a woman to say to her husband . It came down to this , that she meant to stay away from me except when she should need me to pull her out of trouble . She did n’t need me around every day . ”" "“ She did n’t need a man around every day . ”" "“ So this , ”" "“ is what you ’ve been believing all this time ? ”" "“ What , then , did she write you ? ”" "“ Just what I ’ve said : that at last she saw clearly -- that at last she had made up her mind to walk alone . ”" "“ That lets both you and Spencer Mapes out . ”" "“ Oh , Nicholas , surely you remember that she was a singularly cool and aloof woman ? Surely , with that in mind , you should have understood ? ”" "“ We ’ll finish it tonight . ”" "“ Take a drink , ”" "“ We ’ll drink over this thing . I used to discourage your drinking . This shows ! Take a drink ! ”" "“ What ’s the matter ? ”" "“ Are you afraid of me ? ”" "“ Take the drink ; drinks warm one . ”" "“ Here ’s to the cleaning of the stables ! ”" "“ God -- Eva ! ”" "“ Do n’t be literary . I ’m fed up with that tripe . ”" "“ I hope to God , ”" "“ that I ’ll never again run afoul of a literary person ! ”" "“ You see ? I was hard as a rock , as she said . But I beg you to bear in mind that I believed Mapes to be responsible . I said to her : ‘ You need a heavy - fisted beast . You ’d eat the artist who got you -- eat him raw . You need to be knocked down . I wonder if Mapes knows how to knock anyone down ? ’ Oh -- I sneered ! She was breathing in an odd way -- shallow , you know . But I was tremendously wrought up ; I did n’t think , at the time , that this might not be fear of my anger . And she shrugged , and said ‘ What ’s the use ? ’ I kept pounding on her . I said : ‘ I suspect you ’ll say next that with your genius -- the claims of your genius , the right of your genius to devour every other right in the world---- ’ And she said -- she was all but supplicating , and I ’ll never forget it as long as I live : that she supplicated me and I turned a deaf ear---- ”" "“ What can you see to laugh at ? ”" "“ I ’m sorry , I ’m sorry ! ”" "“ You would never understand why I laughed . ”" "“ You must have caught that from Eva . ”" "“ I know you ’re good at words . But they wo n’t help you now ; you ’ve got beyond words . ”" "“ Oh , I ’m not going to strike you . The time for that has passed . ”" "“ I think I was what you might call out of my head , ”" "“ I ’ve only the vaguest recollections of it . I was profoundly shocked , you see . ”" "“ I remember my feeling , and not the links in what I did . And , looking back on it , I lose the intensity of the feeling because no longer have I the intensity of the conviction that then animated me . I actually believed , you know , that---- ”" "“ I can just recall going back into her study to tell her to go to bed . Her head had dropped on the arm of her chair , limp and with her hair hanging forlornly over the chintz . I remember how bright the colours of the chintz were ; I daresay it was by comparison with her white face . She must have been very ill even then . I thought : ‘ She ’s trying to put it over on me . ’ I went across the room and shook her arm . ‘ Come , Eva . This argument is over . Closed . ’ She did n’t reply . She had fainted . I stood there looking down at her . In her bids for publicity she had usually made a better show than this , I said to myself . I saw that the whiskey was still in the glass by her side , and forced enough down her throat to revive her . ”"
Molly: "“ But I ’ll tell all , in the taxi , ”" "“ Only , the drive will be short , and the tale is long . ”" "“ And then , my lamb , you purpose leaving New York in order to write a book about us ? Oh , you ’ll get stories out of us ! You ca n’t conceive of the racket instituted by our crowd ; and Eva Litchfield is our pacemaker . I suspect it ’s because of an underlying discontent with her failure in the marriage line . ”" "“ The look in her mother - in - law ’s eye , ”" "“ The look in her mother - in - law ’s eye . ”" "“ She does look like a scared rat . ”" "“ Mrs. Underhill calling for Mrs. Avery , and she says will you please hurry as it ’s very late ? ”" "“ I must say , ”" "“ that if I ’d realized you had located in such an inaccessible place I ’d never have come by for you . Do you realize that I ’ve wandered for hours ? ”" "“ Now-- ”" "cigarette--“now we ’ll talk over Eva Litchfield ’s affairs . ”" "“ Have you forgotten that no one can avoid colds in the head , in New York in the winter ? It ’s a feature of the brilliancy of the season . ”" "“ Then you must have seen that something was wrong ? And what sort of sensation do you mean ? ”" "“ What did I tell you ? ”" "“ Do -- please -- ask that question of the barkeep ? ”" "“ Do n’t be a wattled turkey gobbler . I ’m your hostess , as you so graphically put it ; and we ’re going upstairs this minute and dine ; and try to be a good Arab and eat my salt without spitting in my eye . ”" "“ I work , ”" "“ under the driving power of the most fundamental of all instincts . I mean -- that instinct which draws men and women together . I mean , ”" "“ I can’t -- I simply can’t -- work except under the influence of blasted love . When the affair is going on I give myself up to the sweep of the wings of the angels . Then , during the inevitable resulting blight , I work . ”" "“ It had occurred to me , on the spur of the moment , that the souse at the bar downstairs might treat me to a good blight . ”" "“ As usual with his sex , he wanted to see Eva Litchfield . Said he had gloated over her picture . That latest photograph does n’t look like her in the least . ”" "“ Would n’t she be showing wear ? ”" "“ Her work is almost precious , ”" "“ I am cooling down ; but by way of justification of my attitude I ’ll say that I object to the implied but ever - present self - praise of the hedonist . Why should Eva take the position that , because she is Eva Litchfield , she is privileged to ruin a party ? Naturally , I do n’t acknowledge your right to ask . What a crowd we are , to be sure ! ”" "“ You were n’t there when Molly read her poem ; so you missed Eva ’s dramatic ‘ That I -- I!--should have to listen to such words ! Such ill - chosen words ! It kills me ! It kills me ! ’ If she for her part is going back on her friends---- ”" "Winnie--“what made him do it ? ”" "“ I should n’t be surprised if Dinah knows . ”" "“ That taunt ! ”" "“ When I remember that , when I came to New York , these were the people I wanted to impress---- ! ”" "“ She was crying . It seems a pity . ”" "“ She is welcome to it ! ”" "“ Look here , ”" "“ I ’ve got to talk . Talk about myself . Or I ’ll blow up . Do you ever wonder about yourself ? Do you ever wonder what it is that holds you back ? ”" "“ It ’s this way . And if you ever repeat it I ’ll say you ’re lying . I am a ‘ good woman ’ . ”" "“ I overheard someone saying it about me , as I came over to speak to you : and it ’s true ! It ’s true ! ”" "“ I did n’t want it to get out on me . Oh , hell -- where ’s a drink ? ”" "“ How long have you been leaning over the back of the sofa ? ”" "“ I was telling Dinah a lot of fibs because she is simple enough to believe me . ”" "“ She ca n’t harm them , and they ca n’t harm her . ”" "“ People-- ”" "raved--“should keep their troubles to themselves . ”" "“ Poor Nick ! It was a sad day for you , when you married me , was n’t it ? ”" "“ But you would do it , you know . All right ! That ’s that . Find your mother , and we will go home . ”"
the novelist: "“ quiet little place where we can talk about Eva Litchfield ’s married life . ”"
Florence: "“ so that we can talk about poor Eva ’s fiasco . ”" "“ Spence would n’t see her even if she were younger . We all know -- although we deny it , and ca n’t after all explain the ramifications of it -- that he has eyes for no one besides Eva Litchfield . I ’m not sure it ’s love---- ”" "“ Why do you suppose Eva told you ? ”" "“ The only good thing about him is that he can make no use in his buildings of what I may chance to say in his hearing . I mean -- it does n’t pay to run around town saying absolutely good things ; the first you know , you read your good things in other people ’s books . That-- ”" "room--“that is the reason authors are so stupid in conversation . ”" "“ --That I may be planning a brilliant line on Eva ’s husband . He irritates me . ”" "“ I tell you frankly , Dinah , that knowing your influence over Eva I felt sure you ’d want to do something about it and asked you here in order to decide on something . ”" "“ But she ’ll ditch herself yet , ”" "“ My lamb , ”" "“ would n’t it be honest if we acknowledged that these days we get together solely to talk about her ? And would n’t it be more open and above board if you acknowledged that you eat it up ? For my part , I ’m frank in my avidity . And I want to say , just here , that I know what Eva herself wants ; above and beyond being talked about whenever men -- and women -- are gathered together in her name , she wants the greatest joy ever experienced by a human being , only , in order that she be not shocked , it must be the joy of creatures without bodies . ”" "“ Sit down , Dinah , ”" "“ I ’m not going to abuse Eva . And , incidentally , I do n’t acknowledge the justice of your attitude of holier than thou . You ca n’t deny several points . You ca n’t deny that you never get on your ear until after you ’ve heard all we have to tell you : and you ca n’t deny that Eva herself in her distastes is almost inhumane . She ’s harsh in her condemnations of what life has brought out in others . And I think that part of the trouble now is that she ’s afraid of the effects of life on herself if she lets go and turns human . ”" "“ She ’s harried -- like a poor wild thing -- and I , for one , am sorry for her . But to hell with it ! Why should I worry myself ? ”" "“ Spence says -- but I have my reason for stating that he does n’t think it -- that her fastidiousness is lack of feeling . It ’s all in her head , he holds . And because she happens to have a thinnish voice he puts that , too , down to a thinness of temperament . And I do n’t believe a word of it . To docket a woman is n’t so easy as all that . ”" "“ Do n’t be ashamed of being in love with Eva , Spence . You ’re a bloodless radish , and for you to so plunge into the maelstrom of human failings is a comfort to your friends . Was n’t radish , ”" "“ what Eva ’s husband called all you men ? She told us about it -- remember ? ”" "“ She has nothing of the sort . She worries all the time over her association with her husband , ”" "“ What Eva needs -- what we all need , and what Nicholas Van Suydam has -- is the feeling of family life , our own family life , just around the corner to walk in on any minute we feel the need of its spiritual boost . Mark my words : it wo n’t be Van Suydam who will smash in the end . He ’ll change , but he wo n’t smash up for once and all . He does n’t have to take a train to go home ; he can put out his hand and touch it . ”" "“ I do n’t think it ; I know it . But I shall stay , as all of us will stay . ”" "“ You think that , too , Florence ? ”" "“ I think a lot of things , and the trouble is that my point of view shifts . I think a different thing each time I speak of it . What a crazy mess ! No conviction about any of us -- except in the case of Eva . She , God knows , has the supreme conviction -- about herself . And she does n’t let us forget it . A conviction as strong as hers must be uncomfortable to live with . Sometimes I ’m taken by surprise to find myself sorry for the poor wretch who married her . ”" "“ Look out , Dinah ! You are going to be let down . Eva has n’t a ‘ story ’ because her life has always been higgledy - piggledy . ”" "“ Oh , yes , my dear ! I did say that she , of us all , has conviction and knows where she ’s going ; and still I say that her life is higgledy - piggledy . Work it out , darling ! ”" "“ Peanut Vender . ”" "“ There ’s no way of getting around it -- a spit of conventionality runs through me , pinning me to discomfort when I stop long enough to think . The thing is , not to stop long enough to think . Possibly I ’m an invertebrate ? When Molly Underhill and Eva Litchfield pull their scenes , such as we had to live through this afternoon , the spirit of Cotton Mather -- or is it Jonathan Edwards?--not that it matters -- seizes on my brain and I think that the best way to fix it is to drop a bomb in our next party and lay us all low at the feet of Saint Peter . If you can stop being a champion of Eva and her divine right to behave as she pleases -- what did you think of it , Dinah ? ”" "“ I acknowledge that Molly snivelled through her nose in high C , and that it was enough to make the gods revolt . But -- and this is more to the point , naturally , for I ’m a selfish woman and like my ease -- it made me feel torn inside by screams I ’m too much of an inherited lady to release , that Eva staged her scene as soon as Molly finished hers . I call it beastly selfish of her . ”" "“ Do you blame Eva ’s husband for leaving her in the lurch and going home ? ”" "“ Of course you know---- ? ”" "“ Ah well , she is at last a Van Suydam ! ”" "“ We are hell cats anyhow , ”" "“ But what do you mean ? ”" "“ It works both ways , ”" "“ The unfortunates who take us over poison us . Why do they ever want us ? ”" "“ We never lapse into nice comfortable bodies around the home fireside . ”" "“ Too bad ! And on top of that , too . But here is , at last , the great unknown . ”" "“ It ’s a swell show , ”" "“ Why ca n’t you laugh at it ? ”" "“ This wo n’t do , ”" "“ You will have to get up your fighting spirit . ”" "“ If you are to beat her out , you must keep yourself in the pink of condition -- like a prize fighter , if you ’ll pardon the comparison . It ’s no half - time job -- building up a great reputation . ”" "“ True . ”" "“ And I answered you , perhaps less simply . For none of us know what ’s doing . ”" "“ Doubtless you will get off in a corner -- and sit on your silly foot -- and moon about your soul ; and if you had a soul would you be here ? There ’s the answer . It ’s the answer to everything about us , to every one of us and our questions about everything . ”" "“ And maybe I agree with you . ”" "“ He ’s making a sketch of Eva , ”" "“ She kept well in his sight until he did . She brought on herself whatever comes . ”" "“ Do I have to take care of everyone who ’s incapable of taking care of themselves ? ”" "“ I take it they ’ve had one of their quarrels , ”" "“ He knocked into a cocked hat all that Yoga stuff you forever tease me about . I wonder what would be happening to me now , if he ’d come down with that beer bottle ? ”"
Spencer Mapes: "“ If the crystal were to be heated ? ”" "“ I was wrong , of course , ”" "“ A crystal ca n’t be heated . ”" "“ Her spirit is too rare , is n’t it , for the things that help you and me to do her the least good ? Life hurts her . And , if we grant this , can we censure her for what she may do -- for what , I might say , I ’m confident she ’s planning to do ? ”" "“ Precisely what I was saying , ”" "“ Poor Eva was led astray by her admirations . She fancied that she would be happy because of the exclusiveness of the Van Suydams . In Eva ’s eyes , exclusiveness is a beauty ; she goes everywhere because she enjoys making an impression , she runs with everyone because she wants to hear what they say about her , and she would love to hate it all . ”" "“ After all , ”" "“ you ’ve just got back . Wait until you ’ve picked up the threads . ”" "“ How do you know I do n’t believe it ? ”" "“ She ca n’t help it . She ’s powerless to change her nature -- as are we all . Women with thin treble voices have no power of emotion . ”" "“ Of course he selected the wrong simile . He meant to say turnip . And if you want to recall what Eva told us , how about that bit to the effect that he said he ’d see everything once , and her counter remark that her friends were never guilty of triteness ? I seem to recall her repeating a quite long and fiery speech she made to him , in which she said that of course he was splendid in his own line but that we were n’t tolerant of platitudes . Which all of you might bear in mind , as it would be sad to fall below Eva ’s praise . ”" "“ I am thankful you ’ve at last returned , Dinah . I always feel that you can be counted on to stand by Eva . ”" "“ You must really go at once to see her . She has one of those little red brick houses in West Eleventh Street just off Fifth Avenue : did you know ? ”" "“ And what do you see -- you with your singleness of purpose ? ”" "“ She insists she did it for love of him , ”" "“ Take Hamlet , as an example of the behaviour of a man who comes at the end of a played - out old family . Hamlet-- ”" "“ --Knew that he should have been man enough to kill -- and what did he do ? He used foul language to the women in the case . If he had acted on his impulse , and killed---- ”" "“ The mind is my weapon . ”" "“ What is Spence driving at ? ”" "“ Hold on to yourself ! ”" "“ You see what is happening already ? Your husband ’s people are sapping your belief in yourself . But -- forgive me ? I had no right to say that . They are your people , now -- so far as they will let you go with them . However , I ca n’t help remembering that I had much to do with making you -- starting you on your career---- ”" "“ Do n’t you girls want to go powder your noses ? ”" "“ You poor little fish out of water ! ”" "“ Do n’t you girls think it would be a good thing if you went and powdered your noses ? ”" "“ Did n’t you want me to be a bohemian ? All right ! I ’ll be a bohemian -- part of the way . ”" "“ Another cup would n’t hurt him . ”" "“ His sort of old stock , one might say , do everything to excess ; they think it their privilege , do n’t they ? You remember what you told me he said about food ? ”" "“ Do n’t you offend your husband ? ”" "“ At times , I ’m sorry for him ! ”" "“ For the reason that women let other interests get in their way---- ”" "“ You must n’t think for an instant that I ’ve anything but your ultimate good at heart . I feel -- to return to our unworthy comparison -- that , in a way , I am your trainer . ”" "“ Do n’t be coddled the wrong way -- the injudicious way . Remember you ’ve your great gift to guard , and for the sake of that gift everything you may want to do yourself -- as a woman -- must go into the discard . ”" "“ It ’s desecration ! ”" "“ My dear Dinah , ”" "“ you never use the delicate rapier ; do you ? Your weapon is the battle - ax . ”" "“ Oh , Eva ! ”" "“ I was having a lonely tea at the Brevoort , and it occurred to me -- for no reason in the world except that of inspiration -- to drop in here on the chance of finding Eva . ”" "“ Our own dear Dinah ! ”" "“ I thought you were upset over the panic . ”" "“ All construction work is about over -- your career is over -- it may be that everything is over . ”" "“ What has happened ? ”"
Eva: "“ Why not have said a diamond ? The diamond is eternal . ”" "“ I came to get my son . ”" "“ I came to snatch my son from hell fire . ”" "“ We have no artists in our family , ”" "“ My son is by way of being an architect . Possibly , in England also , you permit your sons to play before they settle down ? ”" "“ I am in terror of his silence ! He is like a hooded falcon . I never know what he truly thinks of my books . Has he ever told you what he thinks of my work ? ”" "“ Besides , what is there about your friend , and my friend , that you should properly talk over with me ? ”" "“ She will drive him crazy ! ”" "“ You have n’t the least idea of how she acts at home . ”" "“ Oh , I -- I---- ”" "“ It amuses him to do it . ”" "“ Nick detests the sort of person who hangs around Eva at those parties . ”" "“ He dislikes Spencer Mapes . ”" "“ He tells you these things against his wife ? ”" "“ His mother told me . At the tea -- you were talking about the tea at luncheon , Mrs. Avery -- his mother saw Mr. Mapes for the first time ; and I ’m sure she has never stopped worrying about him since . Tony was looking for Nick -- although he was n’t really looking because we knew that he and Eva were talking . And Mrs. Van Suydam said to me ‘ Who is that youngish man with the dark face who seems to be in expectation of something from the room beyond ? ’ ”" "“ But this is an enemy ! ”" "“ Who is that ? ”" "“ Nick darling , we ’ve got to get used to things . And had n’t we better start in by making up our minds to let each other ’s work alone ? ”" "“ With both of them present -- of course ? ”" "“ I ’m frightened by nothing in the way of a town , a place . I ’m only afraid of the things that men do to our spirits . ”" "“ It would be the right thing to hang one ’s spirit so high that it ca n’t be reached : New York has the idea . ”" "“ She made a great sensation . ”" "“ It ’s a fortunate thing that you and I did n’t start life as beauties , ”" "“ I ’ve always thought , Dinah , that you do n’t fit together . Have you ever noticed that your face is n’t the type that should go with your body -- if nature happened to be squeamish , which she is n’t ? ”" "“ No use in saying what you were thinking of saying . I know I ’m a wreck . It ’s only Eva who can work like a slave , and live on a tension , and come out of it looking like an angel . ”" "“ My dear ! ”" "“ I ’m as crazy over her as you are . How can you think I was going to tell something against her ? ”" "“ My love , what a spitfire you ’ve become , ”" "“ It ’s a pity , ”" "“ that men no longer beat their wives ; so much the most potent means of displaying connubial disapproval -- and so much pleasanter for the casual guest , who does n’t often find himself present during the performance . ”" "“ It comes down to this : one is n’t a novelist unless one has a consuming and all - embracing curiosity about people -- all people -- even those of whom one is fond -- every human worm and every superhuman bore ? ”" "“ Of course . ”" "“ Oh , yes , she ’s perfectly beautiful , and she writes like a seraph , but for God ’s sake why does she do those things ? ”" "“ You should be the last one to reproach me with neglect . You should know how it is when one is torn asunder over a book . You should know that it ’s actually birth - pains , in the suffering it causes one . The period of gestation is the same , too -- a matter of the best part of a year . ”" "“ Do you know , Dinah , you ’ve brought me luck , already ! Already I ’ve said something very , very good . ”" "“ Do you have to see me today ? I mean , is it of particular importance ? ”" "“ I do n’t mind telling you , ”" "“ that I ’m in the funniest quandary . ”" "“ Do n’t be literal , ”" "“ Oh , darling -- oh , I ’m so glad to see you ! If you only knew how I need to talk with you ! ”" "“ Oh-- ”" "note--“if you only knew ! Everything is going to pot ! ”" "“ Everything is wrong , ”" "“ I had forgotten all about the house because I was on a book . And it came out that the geraniums had collapsed in that awful pulpy mess which is one of the horrors of autumn . And he said to me that it was strange I ’d talk so much about beauty and not hate the way the geraniums looked . I daresay the sensible course under attack would be to imitate the wild things in the woods : sit motionless until the attacker ’s attention has been diverted . But I reply ; I always reply . He can be rather hateful , like all equable men . ”" "“ Happy -- with Nick ? Of course I am . That is -- I could be , if people let us alone . ”" "“ You mean you see too many people ? No time to be quietly happy and contented ? ”" "“ Sentimental as ever ! ”" "“ I mean , in plain words , that everyone -- Nick ’s friends who are n’t mine , and my friends who are n’t his -- take a hand in the least thing we do . Of course both sides have been at you about us ? ”" "“ Let me tell you that they are n’t the amiable meddlers who beset all newly we d couples . These meddlers are almost malignant -- at least , his side of the mob are malignant . But both sides give an impression of concerted action . They give the impression -- his side , I mean , of course -- of bitterly resenting any appearance on our part of getting on together . They are the prophets howling in the wilderness that they ‘ told us so . ’ And , if it does n’t come out the way they prophesied , they will make it . ”" "“ I simply can not understand how he can do it ! ”" "“ But you were born a pessimist , ”" "“ Not interference , darling : comments . Comments on whatever Nick and I decide to do . In this case , my last summer ’s trip to Europe . They share Nick ’s obsession of the decency of a husband and wife being continually seen in each other ’s company . I went in to see my mother - in - law , whom I adore ; and I overheard this attack on me . ”" "“ You mean , you listened ? ”" "“ I mean just that . Did you never listen when you should n’t ? ”" "“ I think , Augusta , that you ’re hard on her . ”" "“ Oh , it bobs up like the spring flowers , ”" "“ But it was n’t a remark that went down at the Van Suydam establishment . Miss Augusta bristled . She spoke from her chest when she said ‘ As a topic of conversation between unmarried ladies and a gentleman , I should scarcely select that of -- of----Ahem ! ’ With intolerant delicacy she dropped out of the chat the future of the Van Suydam family tree . ‘ Enough ! ’ she decreed , when Miss Lois again pried into my affairs . ”" "“ Was n’t that too adorable , Dinah ? ”" "“ He so fitted in with the smell of lavender . And Miss Augusta briskly called him to task for being impractical . There ’s a man who adores a woman in the right way ! He said to her that when he spoke of creeping age he alluded only to himself ! I almost ran in to hug him ; but I thought I ’d best wait and see what else they had to say about me . I could see that I only stood knee - high with the Misses Ingoldsby , who went into a squabble at this moment . They wanted to know why Nick was staying behind , permitting me to go unattended to Europe . They took the position that poor dear Nicholas could n’t afford to go ; and they left it to be inferred that I was bankrupting him . Miss Augusta threw a censuring look at Mr. Tillinghast and announced that I am far too pretty to go traipsing over Europe alone . ‘ I never-- ’ she said--‘did trust Frenchmen . ’ She sank into deep thought and open doubts . She stirred her tea , efficiently crushing the slice of lemon with her spoon and avoiding the splash that a more frivolous woman would have brought about . ‘ Ahem ! ’ she finally produced triumphantly . ‘ I could have told you the line to take , Lavinia . I ’m very fond of young people , and have given time and thought to their ways ; and I know that they need the guiding hand of more experienced persons through the pitfalls of their life together . One must gain the confidence of young people . Do you think that if I were to talk to Eva it would do any good ? ’ ‘ I think , ’ said my mother - in - law distinctly , ‘ that it is none of your business . ’ ‘ Well ! ’ snorted Miss Augusta , sitting back in her chair . For my part -- lurking in the hall and beginning to think what I should say if Miss Augusta did give me a rowing up salt river -- I wanted to clap my hands when Miss Lois remarked to Mr. Tillinghast ‘ Gussie talks too much . ’ I walked in on them . I was very nice about it . But they were scandalized at my having listened . ”" "“ No . Is n’t it amazing ? Why , it ’s poetry , Dinah ; and he ’s just an ordinary sort of man ! ”" "“ Do you see how he got it into his head ? ”" "“ It was being without me . Poor old Nick ! ”" "“ I reminded him that in the big house in Washington Square there is no sound ; and he came back at me with the statement that in every nook and cranny it conveys that it has always cherished the sounds of the private life of a family . She is still gospel to him . It appears that she walked around here with him one evening ; and all those things for the solution of which he had delved through agony of spirit , all the things that -- undoubtedly from his life with me -- he had begun dimly to see , were contained in his mother ’s simple denial of individual liberty . She said to him : ‘ Leave it to God , my child . He is still able to manage these questions . He -- and nature -- always have . ’ ”" "“ Oh , my God ! ”" "“ It ’s a funny thing , though , ”" "“ He ’s jealous of my fame . ”" "“ It started at a reception his mother gave for me when we were first married . ”" "“ What is the matter , Dinah ? It ’s disconcerting , to have you burble with your amusement when I ca n’t see that this is so very amusing . ”" "“ I apologize for my repetitions , ”" "“ Bother Hamlet ! ”" "“ Would you kill ? I doubt if you ’d even use bad language . ”" "“ Oh , dear me ! Nick is eternally harping on that same thing ! And he ’s driving at nothing . ”" "“ My eye ! ”" "“ He , as an architect , is jealous of me as a novelist . ”" "“ He has a way of saying things harshly . I ca n’t bear harshness . When things happen that hurt your heart , your brain does n’t work . I had had a bad night -- hopeless agony of mind because I could n’t recapture a dream . And I said to him ‘ You ca n’t understand ! ’ If he had said something ! But how was I to know how he took it , when he did n’t say a word ? ”" "“ Dinah , darling : Nick is n’t at all like that . He ’s a Dutchman . He ’s solid and calm to the point of being nearly phlegmatic ; he’s---- No , he is n’t stodgy , bless him ! He ’s a dear . ”" "“ I do n’t see why you say such a thing . Look here : I ’m going to tell you all we said , that morning . Then you can see for yourself . I tried to let him down easily . I said ‘ I knew , last night , that something had gone wrong with you ’ . ”" "“ He did n’t meet me half - way , ”" "“ He was rather mean . ‘ Let us not bring it down to a struggle between us , ’ he said to me . I said : ‘ You know that I believe in you , do n’t you ? ’ He came at me with one of those hateful counter questions : ‘ Do you ? ’ So I looked straight at him and asked ‘ You ’ve never believed in me , have you ? ’ He said -- as if this were quite sufficient : ‘ I ’ve loved you . ’ ”" "“ You do n’t try to understand , ”" "“ I shall lift him ! ”" "“ You mean , you will jerk him up ? ”" "“ Anyone would think , ”" "“ that you were in love with him . ”" "“ He laughed ! ”" "“ I told him that I was going to help him . ”" "“ He used to seem so proud , and so completely happy . His very arm felt happy , when he put it around me as we showed the house to his mother . He had forgotten , Dinah , ”" "“ that he had chosen between his mother and me . ”" "“ Darling , are you quite sure you ’re comfortable ? ”" "“ Something of the sort , ”" "“ Well , then , now that I know you , too , are in a comfortable chair -- I do think our expeditions from one party to another on New Year ’s Eve were so productive of what you might call evil consequences that I must talk with you . And you are in one of your crotchety moods and wo n’t come down here . If you would be sensible and draw up a comfortable chair -- or have you ? ”" "“ You wanted to look at all sides of the prism ; so you should wish to talk Nick over , now you ’ve been out with the two of us in conjunction . By the way , Nick has changed his opinion of you . ”" "“ He really was delicious ! ”" "“ Of course you do n’t care what he says about you ; and it is so seldom that I get the chance to quote him to any effect . I mean , he ’s a man of few words . Sure you do n’t feel badly over it ? ”" "“ And , Dinah-- ”" "account--“and this is my reason for telling you at all , darling -- he said that all of this would be , merely , amusing , if your fingernails were n’t so often broken by the keys of your typewriter . I ’ve implored you to give more time to beauty shops ! ”" "“ She is n’t conceited . ”" "“ Do n’t you remember-- ”" "“ How can I be sure that you admire me , when you cling to your city ? I am not of your city . ”" "“ No other gifts , Nick ? I think I should like you to add the greater gift of intelligence . ”" "“ You ’ll spoil my coat . ”" "“ Do n’t be foolish , ”" "“ Will you keep your eye on Nick ? ”" "“ You are so unaccommodating , ”" "“ Of course I ’m not trying to get rid of him . But -- you wait and see ! ”" "“ Nick -- you old dear ! ”" "“ You see , Dinah ? All I want is to speak to Spencer Mapes ; he ’s arranging for Henry Pepperel to interview me . ”" "“ Stop it ! ”" "“ Heated ”" "“ Ca n’t you turn on more heat in here ? ”" "“ Shut the window , ca n’t you , Nick ? You might have noticed that it was open . ”" "“ I must say , Nick , ”" "“ that in so far as climate goes your town is awe - inspiring . If it were April , this heater would boil us alive . I do n’t see why anyone wants to live in this town . ”" "“ Why do n’t you defend it ? ”" "“ You see ? ”" "“ There ’s Nick -- and he ’s tipsy ! ”" "“ Nick ! Nick ! You ’re gambolling ! And it does n’t suit you in the least ! ”" "“ Oh , please ? ”" "“ I never before saw him like this . ”" "“ I wonder , now , if I told him that ? ”" "“ I know I ’ll have pneumonia , ”" "“ But maybe not ; we have the health of whales . ”" "“ Watch me break through ! ”" "“ Did n’t I see you -- the chaste and elegant you -- kissing Molly Underhill , down at Yancey ’s ? ”" "“ She ’s kissing everyone . But I ’m sure it was n’t Molly I kissed . Are you sure it was ? ”" "“ Nick -- you old dear ! ”" "“ Now , darling , that you ’ve seen Nick and me together , what do you think ? ”" "“ H - m ! ”" "“ Well , anyway , Dinah , you must acknowledge that he ’s a heavy load to carry on my shoulders when I am with my friends ? You see that he ’s impossible at a party . ”" "“ I forgot all about having asked you to come , Dinah . And I ’m not in the mood to talk . Do you mind if we put it off ? Come on : I feel like getting out of sight of this place . ”" "“ I do n’t see why I should be expected to bear it ! ”" "“ In regard to my next book , Spence , I ’m quite sure that the subject of passionate marriage can be so treated as to be without offense . I ’ll put ecstasy into it . It should be treated as poetry and not as a study in flesh and blood . ”" "“ I ’ve found myself thinking , in the midst of tenderness , that there can be nothing in the universe without the right words to convey it . But I ’ve found that the search for the words ruins the emotion . Life is so awful . ”" "“ I ’ve often told him what it was that made me so thoughtful . ”" "“ I wo n’t go yet . ”" "“ You wo n’t stay , ”" "“ You wo n’t stay , because you wo n’t approve of this party more than you did of the one you so charmingly left . ”" "“ As you please , ”" "“ But I want to say this to you : you ca n’t play fast and loose with me , Nick . I do n’t permit my friends to do so . My friends , however , have never wished to treat me in a cavalier fashion . ”" "“ Suppose we go ? ”" "“ I think there is going to be a scene . ”" "“ I wo n’t make a laughing - stock of myself by hanging around you , ”" "“ Some of us are going down to the Metcalfs ’ . ”" "“ Are you coming , too , Dinah ? ”" "“ Do as you please . ”" "“ What is it ? ”" "“ You are sorry you bought this lot ? ”" "“ Too bad ! You did n’t select the lot in the fashionable section ; eh ? ”" "“ Spencer Mapes warned me ! ”" "“ Ah ! ”" "“ I ’m not so sure of that , Nick . You ’ve begun to insult me . ”" "“ I ’ve begun to be hurt . ”" "“ I ’m sorry . ”" "“ I daresay , ”" "“ that this is the first time you ’ve shown what you really think of me . ”" "“ Eva---- ? ”" "“ Here we are , ”" "“ And , my dear , I can tell you this : I prefer my friends . Take that as you will . They have never so meanly criticized me . ”" "“ Men are the trouble , in this life . ”" "“ What happened at home before you left ? ”" "“ You are free , Dinah ! You are free ! ”" "“ What shall I do ? What shall I do ? ”" "“ How can you invariably speak from your own standpoint ? How can you be so sure of what other people should do ? ”" "“ Here you are looking broken down -- absolutely broken down!--at the end of every season ! Are you sure you can still stand the pace ? I certainly think you ’re looking -- well , fagged . ”" "“ The viper ! Dinah , for God ’s sake get off your foot ! You ca n’t imagine how it annoys me , that you always sit on one foot . Someone told me she said I had the childlike vanity of all artists , and had to be praised in order to exist ; and now she comes out with that vixenish thing , and the inference is plain , I think , do n’t you , Dinah ? She means to do all she can to kill my work . Well , she wo n’t be able to , I can tell you ! ”" "“ No ! No , never that ! Without my faith in myself -- without the knowledge of what I can do -- there would be no Eva Litchfield . ”" "“ What was that awful speculation of yours , Dinah -- something about not daring to look within ? ”" "“ What do you think of my work , Addis ? I want to know the truth of what you think . I ’m strong enough to bear the truth . ”" "“ She ca n’t help it . ”" "“ Oh , it ’s only you , ”" "“ It ’s their jealousy . ”" "“ No . Nothing . ”" "“ Thank you , officer . ”" "“ Nothing . Nothing you would understand . ”" "“ He ’s about done in by the stage during which I corrected the manuscript ; he said my jabbering sentences over and over sounded like radios in the distance . He said ‘ What is the matter with it ? That thing stands up . I can understand it . ’ Poor darling ! And I said-- ”" "me--“I said ‘ Suppose I got at you with a comment on your working so hard over a God - awful building that will stand up anyway ? ’ He thought that this meant I was at last grasping his line of work , and he said ‘ Angel girl ! ’ and was happy . He really does n’t , you know , take in what I mean when I say ‘ I ’ll die -- die!--if it leaves my hands before it ’s as perfect as I can make it ! ’ Is n’t it odd , Dinah , that a man thinks kisses -- love - making -- can heal the laceration of the heart over the eternal fact that a book is never up to its conception ? ”" "“ Did you know , ”" "“ that Nick is playing the stock market ? Oh , not plunging ; he says he went in ‘ not enough to ruin us if I lose , but enough to make us if I win . ’ Tony Bloodgood is managing it for him . Nick says his mother is disgustedly shocked , believing as she does that the only sound value is land . But as for me , when he told me I rushed at him and kissed him . And would you believe it , Dinah , although he is the one who is speculating , he was profoundly disgusted by my delight ! He accused me again of loving money . Oh -- we are n’t beyond quarrelling over everything that comes up , in spite of---- ”" "“ I ’ve always wanted a child . ”" "“ I ’m so glad ! So glad ! I have such a wonderful feeling of joy , of happiness , of -- contentment : as if I had found out something . ”" "“ Certainly , ”" "“ How would you have had me do it ? I was bound to tell him how enchanting it was for me to have a child . He took a long breath , as if it went through his body and buoyed him up to the skies . He was quite perfect about it . He could n’t speak . He was afraid to touch me , as if I were a phantom of some delight that had always faded from his grasp . I suspect he ’d had an ideal of me , all along , that would have satisfied me if I ’d been nice enough to find it out . This great breath that he drew -- exalting him to God , Dinah!--was so nearly a deep sigh that it startled me . There ’s a lot to Nick . But I wanted him to say it ; I wanted to see what words he would use . ”" "“ Dinah , that old woman is worthy of praise . She is making a determined effort to see things from my point of view . The now unbroken chain of the Van Suydam family ! She has n’t the slightest desire to see the party , but she considers this the proper time for the family to go out together . ”" "“ I ca n’t bear another blow ! Did you hear her ? What does it come to -- that I ’ve worked , and sold my soul -- when that woman asks what I ’ve written ? ”" "“ I know . It ’s very good of you . ”" "“ Oh , thank you , thank you , Spence ! You do n’t know what a friend you ’ve shown yourself to be -- today -- at exactly this time ! ”" "“ Do you realize that no one considers me ? Have you ever stopped to think that everyone conspires to use up my strength ? ”" "“ It will be a Christmas of work , for me . ”" "“ Do n’t push yourself , ”" "“ I ’ll beat that dreadful woman if it takes me years ! And that is exactly what I ’ve got to do -- push myself , ”" "“ Wait ! ”" "“ I am not going to have that baby ! ”" "“ I saw straight into his mind . It ’s easy to see into a man ’s mind when you ’ve been married to him . ”" "“ You might as well understand , first as last , that I have no intention of going through with it . ”" "“ I have my work to do . I have my career to consider . Let other women have children . ”" "“ If you keep your head , and watch -- and you are a novelist -- life is dramatic : is n’t it ? ”" "“ You are being melodramatic . ”" "“ When you come down here and bother me with doleful prognostications about things that do n’t affect you and me , Dinah , you get me out of sorts . Do n’t be ‘ sensible ’ , will you ? You ’ll spoil your work if you develop executive ability . Nick ’s that way . ”" "“ Spencer Mapes says that Nick has sense while I have sensibility . ”" "“ Of what ? ”" "“ If you had the things to worry you that I have , ”" "“ then I would sympathize , my dear . But as it is -- I have Nick ’s work to worry me , if you want to know . ”" "“ It ’s not surprising , ”" "“ Look around you at these abortions of his trade . ”" "“ How can anyone call these horrid things the result of talent ? ”" "“ I love it , there . One knows , when in that rarefied atmosphere of dried rose leaves , that nothing happens which can shake the world , Dinah . It might do you good to go . You let your nerves play you tricks . ”" "“ You were talking about me , ”" "“ No matter where I go , I find that people have been talking about me . However , we all talk about each other . ”" "“ We do n’t object to being discussed ; it ’s part of the business , really . Only , here in this house , it ’s different . ”" "“ Of course ! I told you that I did n’t object . I came over , to tell the truth , to discuss myself . ”" "“ Nonsense ! Nick ’s mother is never unpleasant . We are staying , old girl , and you might as well resign yourself to it . ”" "“ Very much . I knew , as I came in sight of the house , that I must talk to you . ”" "“ Tell me how to bear life ? ”" "“ The old fallacies ! How can you say a thing like that ? ”" "“ It ’s a thing that everyone does , ”" "“ So you -- and Nick -- are trying with all your might to push me down to a question of that sort ? I see what---- ”" "“ By your creed , the woman with brains is to give up , if she ’s so unfortunate as to fall in love ? ”" "“ My God ! ”" "“ I am tired of being told . ”" "“ What chance would gifted women have , if the world ran as you want it to run ? ”" "“ I think , ”" "“ that when a woman has a gift---- ”" "“ You quote the Bible , and God ’s will : how do you get around what Christ said about the talents ? ”" "“ I ’m sorry . ”" "“ You will never forgive me for laughing . ”" "“ There’s -- literally -- nothing to be done ! ”" "“ I pray you wo n’t disturb yourself over it , Mrs. Avery ; for I once more assure you that I had n’t the slightest objection to anyone hearing what I had to say . ”" "“ Which banks ? ”" "“ Spence , I must go home . I must go home at once . ”" "“ Do you realize that I ’ve never had a break ? Is it because I ’m a woman ? ”" "“ I forgot that I left word for him to join us at his mother ’s . ”" "“ I know all about myself , ”" "“ I wish you would n’t do me . You ’re cruel . ”" "“ Why did n’t one of you make me go home ? I have a feeling of something menacing . I ca n’t understand what is going on . Tony Bloodgood is looking queer , and hunting for Nick : and where -- I want to know -- is Nick ? Oh , Dinah -- you always take up for him ; but even you must acknowledge that he should n’t go off and leave me to face this sort of thing alone ! Some people may be able to bear this sort of thing ; but if you realized how things affect me---- ”" "“ We ’re being foolish ; are n’t we ? There ’s no bogy lying in wait for us . But I ’ll own up , Dinah , that there are times , of late , when I feel afraid in the dark . It must be this damnable depression you forever talk about . I feel---- Well , I do n’t feel natural . ”" "“ Pentreath is n’t human , is he ? But he ’s great ! Why should any of us mind what he does , or says ? That is what it is to be truly great . ”" "“ I asked Spencer Mapes what he seriously thinks of your work---- ”" "“ He said that , while he had n’t heard of you until we married , he had no doubt but that , with inspiration---- ”" "“ The real trouble is that neither of them has a vestige of tact . Talk of eugenics ! Two tactless people should n’t be permitted to marry . ”" "“ You ca n’t take it in that something dreadful is happening inside me ? You ca n’t comprehend that an artist ’s imagination is a delicate , brittle , easily injured quality ? ”" "“ You do n’t know how you stare at me ! ”" "“ This was where I was cruel to her , Dinah -- and I know it now . I suppose I knew it then , and wanted to be cruel . You see , I do n’t trust the influence of that fellow Mapes . You can never put your finger on Eva ’s motives ; they ’re damned complex for a simple man to follow . ”" "“ I ’m sorry , Nick . But it had to be this way . I must---- ”" "“ I ’ve decided nothing . Will you , or wo n’t you , come down here ? ”" "“ All right . ”" "“ Dinah darling , you do n’t mind if I go on talking to Edgar ? Then we can go straight downtown with my conscience clear . ”" "“ I ’ll draw up a water - tight contract . It will be ready for you to sign tomorrow . I trust-- ”" "husband--“I trust that Mr. Van Suydam is agreeable to your going ? ”" "“ What I do , ”" "“ is my own affair . Is that all we had to talk over , Edgar ? ”" "“ She certainly does n’t ! She ’s coming with me . ”" "“ Suppose we go down on the bus , and ride on top ? ”" "“ I want to take a good look at the new buildings . ”" "“ I wonder ? ”" "“ Nick ’s right when he says that I can never understand what I feel until after my next reaction . ”" "“ We ’re going all the way to Washington Square . ”" "“ Dinah , you wo n’t fail me ? You must go with me to see Nick ’s mother . ”" "“ In a lot of ways , I do n’t want to go ! ”" "“ It always smells of the things I really and truly like -- lemon verbena , and lavender , and pot - pourri jars . ”" "“ I ’ve forgotten what I wanted to say to her . ”" "“ Would n’t you think she would ask me to come to her upstairs sitting - room ? But she never has . ”" "“ Have you looked at those stodgy Van Suydam faces along the walls ? If I ’d become the mother of one of them , I ’d have had a latchkey ! ”" "“ Shame on you ! ”" "“ If I liked this sort of thing , I could stay here and be a nice lady and forget that I ever was an artist . I think I do n’t know what I want . ”" "“ Pick your hour upon the stage , Eva Litchfield , and stick to it . And do n’t be a fool , before this old woman , simply because you admire her as a distinct literary find . That ’s all she is , really , Dinah , ”" "“ I know -- none better!--that she ’s stupid . ”" "“ I ’m going to Hollywood . ”" "“ You ’ve never let me tell you about it . ”" "“ And what does my son say to this scheme of yours ? ”" "“ It is purely a question of money , ”" "“ You mean that you do understand -- you do really understand ? ”" "“ It means , simply , that I must -- I intend -- to tell you why I ’ve made up my mind to go to Hollywood to make some money . ”" "“ So there ! ”" "“ Why is it that you refuse to listen to me ? ”" "“ There ’s nothing here for you . ”" "“ You belittle me in order to aggrandize Nick ’s puny little talent ! That ’s what it comes down to ! You know it ’s true : I can see in your eyes , ”" "“ Forgive me ? Forgive me ? ”" "“ I ’m truly sorry I said it , ”" "“ I wish I could make you see ? I do n’t think that I intend doing these things . I ’m impelled by some force within me . My life seems driven on by some force within me---- ”" "“ That ’s that , ”" "“ I ’ve done all I can . She ’s impossible . ”" "“ I ’ve never known all ! ”" "“ It was undoubtedly pneumonia . It could have been nothing else . The doctor diagnosed it as pneumonia . The way she breathed---- ”" "“ I beg you to believe me when I say that I know no more than you . What I may surmise , and what you may suspect , are probably different . But I should n’t be doing my duty to my son if I let you go away without plain speaking on my part . My son has told me nothing . So far as I know , he never had an approach to a quarrel with Eva . ”" "“ How can you listen to things against me ? ”" "“ What ’s needed in here is something natural . Air is the only natural thing left to you and me . ”" "“ I ’ve always known that Mapes would break us up . ”" "“ It ’s very late , Nick . Do n’t you think we might finish this at another time ? ”" "“ It ’s just that I ’m so cold . ”" "“ Oh , Nick -- you do understand ? That ’s the way I feel about it . ”" "“ You ’re hard . You ’re like a rock , and I dash my life out at your feet . ”" "“ What do you want ? ”"
The Englishman: "“ I saw her -- on her way here , although it did n’t occur to me that she could conceivably be on the way here -- driving uptown in a horse - drawn carriage ! ”" "“ I have an old aunt , ”" "“ That generation of nice old ladies had no use for their own sex . You notice that her attention is riveted on Spencer Mapes ? Oh -- unobtrusively , delicately ; but with such passion of feeling ! ”" "“ Your son , then , is a writer ? ”"
Pomeroy: "“ I never before saw such iron self - control . Do you notice that she does n’t tap her foot on the floor , as all women under stress do ? For you ’ll admit that she ’s under stress ? ”" "“ Ah splendid ! ”" "“ Meaning-- ? ”" "“ I adore his mother . And let me tell you that men have adored old ladies for less worthy reasons than mine for my passion for Mrs. Van Suydam . She tells me that she ’s disappointed in Eva ’s books because they have n’t the rich meaty flavour of Moll Flanders . She ’s added to the rich meaty flavour of my life . You should talk to her , Dinah . ”" "“ What , then , keeps them going ? ”" "“ Their excited nerves . ”" "“ Pray for strength , ”" "“ For this is nothing to how you ’ll feel when Eva gets at you with her own inner secret side of it . ”" "“ Florence , dearest , ”" "“ it ’s so amazing that none of you see it ! She knows that she ’s a personage . Her peculiar charm would be spoiled if she were humorous about herself . She knows that her part is to skim through life like a bird , or to hang on the wall like a picture . ”" "“ But , as you know and will never admit , there ’s a good deal of the snob in our Eva . She thoroughly believes , poor girl , that what she wants of life is the social security which every now and then she so deliberately chucks overboard . ”" "“ My dear Dinah ! ”" "“ My dear Dinah ! ”" "“ What have I said ? ”" "“ You wo n’t be helping Eva by fighting her other friends , ”" "“ Our own dear Dinah ! ”" "“ What you need is to confess to me , ”" "“ I would n’t offer a penny for your thoughts : I know them . If you will study the life of the outsider , why do n’t you take it lightly and get some amusement out of it ? Watch how I do it -- for instance . ”" "“ Darling ! Act pretty for the ladies ? ”" "“ You see ? It ’s beautiful ingenuousness that redeems the casual stranger in our midst . Van Suydam has n’t beautiful ingenuousness . ”" "“ Call out the names of ‘ us ’ loudly enough , and you will start up a hue and cry ; and tomorrow these people will buy your books . Never neglect a chance of advertising amongst the masses . ”" "“ Winnie -- dearest!--don’t be literal ? That could be arranged . ”" "“ And---- ? ”" "“ Not long enough to hear much , ”" "“ Do finish it ? You were going to say---- ? ”" "“ She ’s a frustrated victim of her early environment . She ’s afraid she will die in the state of grace that her mother would wish for her . She will be mortified when she faces God . ”" "“ Dinah -- darling ! ”" "“ Do n’t allow yourself to become a virago . ”" "“ It ’s simple to guess what Molly Underhill is after : she ’s after a load of sin . ”" "“ Dearest ! ”" "“ Do n’t be silly . ”" "“ There ’s Priscilla Swords : upon my word , I have to hold myself back from bolting in her direction . ”" "“ I ’ve taken you everywhere ; I ’ve arranged for you to meet the most famous people in New York ; and what impression has it made on you ? Not a dent ! ”" "“ Oh , God , Priscilla ! That ’s the one thing they are n’t ! ”" "“ So she got under your skin , with her formula ? ”" "“ And to think that I started to go to the theatre instead ! ”"
Mrs. Van Suydam: "“ I shall be obliged if you will fetch my son . ”" "“ Humph ! Indeed ! ”" "“ She said to me ‘ And which of these ladies and gentlemen are my son ’s especial friends ? ’ This being soon after the marriage I was at a loss : for who among us knew much about him ? Who among us , even now , knows much about him ? We really agree with Mrs. Van Suydam , who did n’t then , and does n’t now , recognize a possible bridge between her family and the artists who make the toys with which Van Suydams amuse themselves when so minded . You realize that she must have had some definite plans for her son -- that she must have followed the best lines of the dowager tradition and picked out a wife for him ? She wanted Gertrude Cuyler , who ’s wholesomely without talents , to marry Nicholas . The Cuyler girl was the woman whose eventual stepping into her shoes she could have borne with equanimity . But I hear that his objection to Gertrude was that she insisted too strenuously on the fact of her never feeling ill ; while , he is reported to have said , he did n’t admire sickly women , there was a happy mean between bouncing health and a lady ’s delicately tenacious hold on life . ”" "“ Eva is so attractive to men ! ”" "“ Miss Ingoldsby is my aunt , ”" "“ My aunts are very intimate friends of Mrs. Van Suydam ’s ; they went to boarding school together , years and years ago , ”" "“ She talks freely to my aunts . Who else is there for her to talk to about Eva ? ”" "“ She is obliged to talk about Eva , you see , because everybody talks about Eva . ”" "“ That , ”" "“ I always say that your house is the only place left in New York where I feel at home , Lavinia , ”" "“ You know how , at a thing that has taken you aback , the muscles of your face slip , you think , for the rest of your life ? Hers had slipped , at the shock of finding that there are those who consider me greater than the Van Suydams , into the inflexible front that she meant from then on to show . She , simply , wo n’t acknowledge it . ”" "“ I saw his face . He said to me -- laughing it off : ‘ A prophet in his own country , eh ? A man ’s reputation never exists in his family . ’ The cronies were coming up to say goodnight ; and they said ‘ Nick , we never before realized what a famous woman you had married . You certainly did look high ! ’ Of course , the next morning I tried to smooth it over . ”" "“ We shall have a lovely Christmas , children , ”" "“ And I hope it may be a bracing , biting spell of weather , such as we had -- I recall it vividly -- the winter Nicholas was born . ”" "“ Think of your unborn child , ”" "“ Augusta ! ”" "“ You wished to speak to me , you say ? ”" "“ The only way to bear life is to do your duty ”" "“ The sense of duty to the man one loves comes out of the fact of the love -- if it ’s love ”" "“ How do you know I do n’t love him more than I do myself ? ”" "“ Let us be frank with each other ? I am not afraid of words . ”" "“ I had the right of decision . ”" "“ In the eyes of God , you had nothing of the kind . ”" "“ Listen to me very carefully , if you please -- you said , I believe , that you are not afraid of words ? It comes down to what a man is , and what a woman is . The child is the ultimate answer . As you have settled this question to suit your convenience , my son---- ”" "“ From now on , you will find that my son feels for you the variety of love that a man thinks he feels for his mistress . ”" "“ I see what the question is : it ’s whether I shall be harnessed ! It ’s whether I will submit to being harnessed ! It ’s whether I will meekly agree to demand no more chances than women had in the Middle Ages . I -- to be no better than they ! ”" "“ It ’s the choice that has always existed , you young fool : the choice between the women men marry and the women they make their mistresses . ”" "“ Those brains are designed to feed the brain of the unborn child . ”" "“ It does run that way . ”" "“ All women , ”" "“ have the gift of which I speak . ”" "“ Christ spoke of men . ”" "“ I did not forget that you were there , Mrs. Avery . I had , however , no objection to your hearing what I said to my son ’s wife . She badly needs discipline . ”" "“ For of course you ’ll tell it . ”" "“ That was nice of you . Does the gentleman know anything about architecture ? ”" "“ Shall we agree , ”" "“ that we do n’t , and never can , understand each other ’s aims ? ”" "“ Clutching the mike as if it might get away before they made good , they smiled because this would prove them to be men worth while . Their smiles were awful . They stretched their lips over their teeth and did n’t dare draw them back into place . The poor clergyman tried to believe that he was exhorting a congregation . His voice smiled , his face was benevolent , his eyes beamed kindly down from an imaginary pulpit . And because he fell into his old way of drugging his congregation , no one listened to his words . But when he came towards our pane of glass to say goodbye -- they were punctilious about this ceremony -- he walked bravely ; and he smiled . Oh , damn ! Listen , Nicholas : I ’ve got to have another drink ! ”" "“ You do n’t think they are the only men in this town who go on smiling because they do n’t dare stop ? She told me , a few days ago , that she must get away . She told me that she could n’t work at home . She told me that I had n’t the right to forbid it , because she could always make the money to go with . She was sitting just there at her writing - table , but she had whirled around so that her back was to her typewriter ; she did n’t seem to know why she was there . She said that she felt me disapprovingly in the house . I asked her if she realized that I might feel her disapprovingly in the house ? She said that she wanted peace ; and I asked her if she did n’t grasp it that she was n’t giving me peace ? ”" "“ It ’s so early that I was n’t sure tea was what you wanted . ”" "“ Ah Mrs. Avery ! An unexpected pleasure . ”" "“ Indeed ? ”" "“ I took it for granted , ”" "“ that you fancied I could n’t understand . ”" "“ I understand much . ”" "“ Humph ! Indeed ! ”" "“ I wished to -- I thought it wise to talk it over with you . ”" "“ I assure you that there has never been a question of such a thing coming about . This is a matter of business solely . ”" "“ Business ? Well , that , ”" "“ is beyond my province . I don’t -- really -- grasp what you mean to infer , by mentioning business in connection with my son ’s wife going to a place like Hollywood . ”" "“ Yes ? ”" "“ Mrs. Avery , I can not express my regret that you should have been brought -- against your will , I am sure!--into a discussion of this sort . ”" "“ Not called for . ”" "“ My dear Eva , ”" "“ why do you always explain ? Is it because you suspect that you are -- usually -- wrong ? ”" "“ I can give you no advice about schemes for making quick money , as I believe it is called . ”" "“ I can give you no advice because I can conceive of no situation in which a wife should not defer to the advice of her husband ; and this I imagine you have n’t done . ”" "“ Besides , it ’s quite evident to me that you ’ve already made up your mind . ”" "“ Get out of this , now you know that this old woman has the power to shake you . Preserve your future , at any cost . ”" "“ I see no difference , ”" "“ between you and my friends . You hold me off , and it ’s for the identical reason that they hold me off . ”" "“ I had never dreamed , ”" "“ that the day would come when I should be compared to ‘ artists ’ . ”" "“ that you know it ’s true ! ”" "“ My dear Eva , I must ask you to leave me now . I am not so young as I once was , and tire easily . I must lie down before I go for my drive . ”" "“ I ’ll go to Hollywood , for all that , ”" "“ If I do n’t listen to those wings , what ’s to become of me ? ”" "“ I shall go to Hollywood , ”" "“ I am meeting my son . ”" "“ Why should n’t I feel free to mention my son ? ”" "“ Drive on ! ”" "“ It ’s dreadful -- and good -- to be so old that one knows when things are impossible . ”" "“ Drive on ! ”" "“ Mrs. Avery , you know so much about the intimate personal affairs of my son and his late wife-- ”" "voice--“that I must ask you : have you the slightest idea what took place between them at the last ? ”" "“ I am telling you this to show you that my son loved his wife . You can never after this suspect him of an indifference that might have caused her to wish to die . ”" "“ Why is everything good dying before my eyes ? ”" "“ My son loved Eva , and his life is probably spoiled . He has ideas in his head which only time can eradicate . I am convinced that he never said a cross word to her . But , as you know , I myself had several conversations with my daughter - in - law which in the light of her death I regret . You will be doing me a favour if you tell your friends that I -- and not my son -- undoubtedly upset her . And , Mrs. Avery , you will kindly refrain from repeating to my son , if you should see him , what his wife said in your presence about his work . ”"
We: "“ What is it ? ”" "“ We ca n’t , ”" "“ fail to show up there . ”" "“ Because we always go there on New Year ’s Eve . ”" "“ So glad to meet you . What is it you have written ? So glad to meet you . ”" "“ Heugh ! Got him ! ”"
him: "“ The ol’ girl do n’t seem to take it in that she might get killed . ”"
Glidden: "“ I never try to alter conditions amongst my friends . Diseases are so much more interesting than remedies . ”" "“ But you ’re so ambiguous in your talk , ”" "“ I think he ’s a dreadful fellow . Of course , she revolts me , occasionally . What does she want ? What is she reaching for ? And what -- and this is the interesting point -- is she trying to do with this man she married ? ”" "“ She herself does n’t know . And what at best , ”" "“ I mentioned her , ”" "“ because she happens to be sitting a few tables away . ”" "“ Women are so amazing . They know when they ’re being talked about -- with the exception of Eva , ”" "“ Eva is sublimely oblivious -- most of the time . It ’s so lovely to watch a person who is sublimely oblivious . ”" "“ You ’re so literal ! ”" "“ I ’m sure that if Eva had n’t been the subject of open gossip she would have seemed ordinary to Mrs. Van Suydam ; she would have been no more than a very pretty woman whom her son had ‘ picked up ’ and fallen in love with -- foolishly but understandably . But Eva had been ‘ talked about ’ ; she was a woman who could , therefore , smear an impious finger over the fair name of the Van Suydams , and the old lady got the wind up . I think she came uptown to that tea , where she knew her son would be and where she suspected Eva would be , in order to bear him off in triumph . It did n’t occur to her that she could fail . ”" "“ Did n’t you get the idea ? He refused to go with her . He stayed behind to ask Eva Litchfield to marry him . That ’s the point , do n’t you see ? ”" "“ Freye Remsen bought one -- in a glass box -- named Emma . Emma dropped her party manners in the home ; the next morning she bit him . ”" "“ What was wrong with that ? ”" "“ What do you object to ? ”" "“ I ’d like you to write an article on that for my magazine . Not over three thousand words . And-- ”" "enthusiasm--“we do n’t pay much . ”" "“ I think it will be splendid . Perfectly splendid . So typical of certain aspects of American life . Treated fantastically , of course , ”" "“ What is he apt to do ? ”" "“ I was thinking of life . It ’s quite a building , in itself -- life . Take Eva : I ’ve always been curious to see what Eva would do with life . She makes such interesting experiments . ”" "“ It ’s actual beauty , ”" "“ What is the matter with you women , anyway ? Why turn and rend Eva ? ”" "“ Will you stand by ‘ hedonist ’ ? ”"
She: "“ And yet , since my return I ’m hearing nothing but hints of trouble . ”" "“ Do n’t try to ‘ help ’ . ”" "“ Eva Litchfield is very beautiful . ”" "“ You might ask Mrs. Van Suydam if she agrees with the Bible that authors should stay at home . She will , of course -- in this case . ”" "“ All of you make such jokes , ”" "“ And I said to Tony that we had better go---- ”" "“ She ’s married ! ”" "“ And Nick is bored to death at those literary teas . ”" "“ Mr. Mapes was waiting for Eva . Everyone knew that , except Mrs. Van Suydam . ”" "“ Nothing else in the place that exactly matched the shade of my frock , ”" "“ He was off key , ”" "“ He has no ear . ”" "“ Have you got to make that noise ? ”" "“ It makes me doubt that he will ever be a great architect . ”" "“ Playfully , mind you ! And after having brought me to the verge of collapse ! ”" "“ Do stay out of here , ”" "“ If you do n’t stay out of here when I ’m working---- ! ”" "“ He came across the room and tipped my chin up , ”" "“ When I was working ! I said I wished he would keep out of my sight . I said it over and over because he merely looked at me . ”" "“ Why did he ‘ merely look at you ’ ? Was it displeasure ? Because , really , Eva---- ”" "“ No ! No ! ”" "“ He has a way of ‘ merely looking ’ . ”" "“ So ! That ’s the way it is ! ”" "“ You do n’t deal in words . You can always return -- at once -- to your work . You can pick up that piece of chalk and go back to your lines . But the word -- the right word -- it ’s always dodging us ; it ’s always out of our reach ; it ’s the elusive essence of art . My God ! ”" "“ everything intrudes ! ”" "“ He ca n’t possibly fly off his head . He glares . He asked me what I wanted , anyway ? Did I want him to sit in the hall , like a lackey -- he would say that ; his mother would have said it -- not to speak , not to move , not to -- exist , by Jove!--unless I pressed a button ? He wound up by remarking that I was asking a good deal of him . ”" "“ They were drinking tea . It ’s a rite in the good old manner , at my mother - in - law ’s . The Ingoldsby sisters and Mr. Tappan Tillinghast -- isn’t that a delicious name , Dinah , if one uses the sonorous whole of it?--sat politely , watching my mother - in - law handle the fat silver teapot . She has the grand manner when she pours tea ; and she ’s intelligent enough to know it and to therefore cling to the custom -- although I believe she would scorn to play to the gallery of even her intimate friends . It was delightful , and I stood around the door jamb and admired it . ”" "“ It all came out of my leaving Nick alone in the summers . Poor old Nick ! He ’s sentimental . After the first summer , he told me that my study had gleamed with coppery flashes of a threat . The summer is dreadful , in New York , is n’t it ? ”" "“ Oh , Nick , darling ! ”" "“ You ’re a Dutchman , ”" "“ So many things are more important than the question of food . ”" "“ I ’m tired of hearing about it . ”" "“ Lucullus Kahn reminds me of a fawn with fleas . ”" "“ Do you remember what Nick called me ? ”" "“ It ’s such a nice party , Jimmie . ”" "“ Is that beyond a man ’s comprehension ? ”" "“ Oh , but , you know , you ’d never feel this way because you are n’t made of the same clay . ”" "“ You should know that I ca n’t wear fresh flowers . They wither at once , if I wear them . ”" "“ Do n’t be so childish , ”" "“ Who does n’t like money ? ”" "“ Oh , do n’t they ! ”" "“ As I said , ”" "“ you ’ve the instincts of your family . Dinah , do you know that they hold on to their belongings -- in Nick ’s case , it ’s his wife -- as if they were increasingly valuable lots on the island of Manhattan ? I assure you , they look upon wives and children as ‘ lots ’ . ”" "“ I ca n’t bear it . ”" "“ Hold tight , Eva ! Keep the reins ! You ca n’t afford to go off the deep end . ”" "“ You know , Dinah , that I ’ve gone off the deep end so many times ? ”" "“ Hold tight , you awful fool ! ”" "“ It ’s a line of thought for a future novel ! Have human beings always trod the measure , do you suppose , Dinah ? ”" "“ It must be a modern dance of life , as opposed to the dance of death of that old bridge in Switzerland -- you remember , Dinah ? You must have seen it , when you were taken to see the sights upon your first trip to Europe ? ”" "“ In spite of what ? ”" "“ He ca n’t see how , when a book is at last finished , one is played out , fagged , and terribly glad . ”" "“ It was the last thing I expected , ”" "“ I am glad , ”" "“ I should think you could tell . ”" "“ You did say that as if you were an ancestor ! ”" "“ Who-- ”" "gurgled--“do you think is going with us ? Nick ’s mother ! ”" "“ But I do appreciate it , Jimmie . I think they are very nice . ”" "“ She has put on her diamond earrings ! ”" "“ A small glass of sherry , if you please . ”" "“ Times are changing ; and I hope I am not narrow - minded , ”" "“ So glad to meet you . So glad to meet you . Let me see , now -- what is it you have written ? So stupid of me to forget . ”" "“ in her condition , ”" "“ Not so much as you love yourself . ”" "“ What do you think my friends would say , if you did this to me ? What do you think would be the eventual verdict of the world , if Eva Litchfield were fetching and carrying and bearing children for the Van Suydams ? ”" "“ You ! ”" "“ You ! Oh---- I ca n’t bear it ! ”" "“ She keeps saying that she is so afraid to be poor . ”" "“ He does n’t say . ”" "“ Not that his letters are frivolous , Mrs. Avery , ”" "“ Mrs. Avery , you were unhappily present at the only two portentous interviews that ever took place between my daughter - in - law and myself . The stand I took I am satisfied was for my son ’s best interests . ”" "“ How despicably cruel ! ”" "“ How calculatingly cruel you can be , Mrs. Avery ! ”" "“ You force me to tell you something that I had never thought to let pass my lips . ”" "“ I ’ve always been honest with you . ”" "“ Nothing . What on earth should I wish you to do ? ”" "“ Ca n’t you understand , ”" "“ that I do n’t want a divorce ? That I do n’t need a divorce ? Why should I want a divorce , when God knows I ’ve had enough of marriage ? ”" "“ I think we could be friends . We ’d be so much better friends if we were separated . ”" "“ We could have Christmas together ; and we might write to each other . ”"
our: "“ Why do women invariably demand an answer ? Some problems have none . ”"
He: "“ Why do n’t you ask her husband ? ”" "“ Why discuss this ? ”" "“ She ’s so weak , ”" "“ For all her talk , she lets him bully her . You should have seen him dragging her -- all protests , half - way in hysterics -- from a dinner given for her , because his mother was giving a reception for her later on and Van Suydam thought it discourteous for them to be absent when the first guests arrived . I mean -- it was discourteous : but she ’s Eva Litchfield , and some leeway must be allowed her . ”" "“ He is as punctilious as she should be , and does n’t see that she would truckle at once to a man who hit her a good smacking blow between the eyes . Women like it . Why do you laugh ? ”" "“ A sort of reflection on Eva , ”" "“ You do n’t understand , then , ”" "“ I was deeply gratified to see that Eva ’s last book received from London the enthusiastic praise that we in New York had already given it . ”" "“ How dare you praise a beautiful woman ? ”" "“ I give up ! ”" "“ To see you treated as an experiment in sociology---- ”" "“ There ! There ! The poor girl is cold ! ”" "“ Hear him , now ! He puns by way of starting the New Year right . Young Guy , where thou goest I will go : you will never lose me . ”" "“ Thank God for this marvellous New Year ’s Eve ! ”" "“ All human beings together , on this glorious occasion ! ”" "“ He ’s always kind until he starts writing his interview . ”" "“ My good woman , do n’t be partisan . At every opportunity , you ’ve stated that there are two sides to a question . Why not , with your always well explained inquisitiveness , look into Eva ’s husband ’s side ? ”" "“ Do you ever dream -- in private -- you writing folk ? ”" "“ All tosh , ”" "“ It is in effect , the litany of literary people : ‘ Oh dear God , grant me the time for writing ! ’ You are n’t angry , are you ? ”" "“ You ’re a breed set apart , by your own wish , from mankind : what are your sources of laughter ? ”" "“ You nervously organized sensitives -- to quote my wife -- who cling together , working each other into tantrums , preying on each other , wrecking each other : tell me , do you like each other ? ”" "“ She ’s so untouchable , ”" "“ Dear old Nick ! You will be foolish ! ”" "“ You ’ve behaved like a wild thing all day . ”" "“ Very well . I ’ll drop you at the door . I sha n’t go in . And let me say this , Eva : you ’re being discourteous to our hostess , who does n’t belong to the ‘ union ’ . ”" "“ People -- nice people -- don’t openly bay down the trail after it . ”" "“ You would do this -- you ? ”" "“ I remember once when she had asked me to read proof sheets to her , and she was cutting up over quite minor mistakes , I assure you -- saying that the printers had tampered with her words , and appealing to me in the most agonized way to know if I had n’t an ear -- and the telephone rang in that awfully annoying way it has , off and on , off and on ; and she simply screamed to the maid to tell Winnie Conant that she was out -- to tell her she was dead -- to tell her anything . And , the point is , she gets ahead with her work in , and as a direct result of , her emotional upsets . Sometimes I ’m appalled by her vital energy . But when it comes to turning some of that energy into the minutiæ of living she ’s horrified at the interruption . She does n’t , ”" "“ open her mail for weeks at a time . ”" "“ But it is n’t I who is up to reforming ! She ’s putting her shoulder to the wheel of changing me ! ”" "dispassionate--“Do you realize that if this goes on I shall be unfit for work ? ”" "“ Are you laughing at me ? ”" "“ For I assure you that it ’s no laughing matter . It has -- got out of my hands . ”" "“ And now you want me to put something into her head ? ”" "“ Why did I fail to kick him out ? What ’s lacking in me that I never act on my impulses ? ”" "“ I seldom act on my convictions , to tell the truth . This is because I stop long enough to think it out -- I want to be fair , you know . But a man should n’t stop long enough to think out a crisis . Once it is thought out , a crisis becomes an emasculated psychological situation . There ’s something wrong with the age , ”" "“ You ’re sorry that you are n’t sorry that jealous husbands no longer flog gentlemen callers . You feel it to be the correct impulse ; and you have n’t been able to stem the stream that ’s swept our generation beyond it . You ’ve turned the clock back -- perversely -- and its ticks are muffled in your re - adjusted hearing . I mean -- you did , of your own accord , step out of Washington Square . Why do you try , in your mind , to step back ? ”" "“ Eva married me . And a wife becomes what her husband is . Eva is now a New Yorker . ”" "“ Our gills have dried , you might say . ”" "“ I fail to see what you ’re driving at . ”" "“ Nonsense ! I was dazzled by her face . ”" "“ You have the rapt look of the literary sleep - walker , ”" "“ Are you trying to drag me in spirit to the pane of glass ? ”" "“ Dinah , I must interrupt to say---- ”" "“ She ’s out , ”" "“ Can you take a message for Miss Litchfield ? ”" "“ Will you tell Miss Litchfield , please , that it ’s all right about the Hollywood contract ? ”" "“ I ’ll tell her as soon as she comes in . ”" "“ You heard ? That ’s what she means to do . ”" "“ Go to Hollywood by all means . And bear in mind that you go with my consent . ”" "“ It is n’t filled ! ”" "“ Both of us need a period of rest from each other . ”" "“ You said you wanted peace -- repose . That was what you said , was n’t it ? ”" "“ Huh ? ”" "“ Dinah , you and I need a drink . ”" "“ We ’re getting nowhere . ”" "“ What is this thing that you ’re putting over without consulting me ? ”" "“ I acknowledge I do n’t see what you mean . You ’re usually inconsistent ; but this time you ’ve gone beyond the reasoning faculties of a mere man . ”" "“ Only make it as quiet as possible , on account of my mother . ”" "“ God , Eva ! ”" "“ I said to her : ‘ It ’s Mapes , I daresay . ’ I had just heard , incidentally , that he was out there . And she laughed -- laughed heartily , as if I were trying to be amusing . It got me . I ’ll admit that at once I knew how I had always feared Mapes . I think I struck my fist on her writing - table , and shouted ‘ Christ ! ’ My voice was so loud that it made me jump . When I cleared my throat -- because suddenly it had closed up -- the rasp of it seemed , in my ears , to beat against the mountain of her meaning , and fall , and come back at me to hurt my head . ‘ There ’s nothing left , ’ I said to her . I spoke in a new queer soft voice : maybe she did n’t hear . And then -- I remember , now -- I kept on saying : ‘ Now then , let ’s get this straight . I ’m rather at sea . Let ’s be sensible . ’ ”" "“ For was it sensible , for her to keep on with ‘ Do be nice about it , Nick ? ’ ”" "“ She made it plain that she did n’t need me around at all ! How did I fail to make myself indispensable to her ? ”" "“ The truth about Eva was that she could n’t , constitutionally , combine work and marriage . And she cared more for work . ”" "“ But Spencer Mapes ! ”" "“ I ’m glad your windows are above the trees . Trees are sometimes curious about what ’s going on in a room , and malevolent . ”" "“ No whiskey ! After I ’ve told you what now I must tell you , you will see that -- that just this minute I ca n’t stand the thought of whiskey . ”" "“ Nick -- help me ! I feel so strangely---- ”" "“ Nothing hurts , especially , but-- ”" "puzzled--“I seemed to slip out---- ”" "“ You would , ”" "“ I know , now , that she looked like an angel always . ”" "“ To show you something , ”" "“ See that ? I could have built that if I had n’t met you ! ”"
Gertrude: "“ Mrs. Avery , ”" "“ you do n’t object if we walk along with you ? I tried to leave at the same time so that I might have a chance to talk with you , ”" "“ I do n’t want you to think we eavesdropped . ”" "“ Eavesdropped ? ”" "“ You both spoke loudly , ”" "“ I know most of you . And naturally I knew what you were talking about , ”" "“ I do n’t know how any of you talk at home . ”" "“ I ’m so sorry that I must leave you here . I have some shopping to do . ”" "“ But I thought we would have a talk , because I heard you say to Mr. Glidden that you were going to walk across to Sutton Place . ”" "“ Oh , I know that . I know that , Mrs. Avery . But then , you see , Nick is a friend of ours . ”" "“ Ca n’t you do something about it ? Ca n’t you talk to her about it ? Ca n’t you tell her that she will ruin Nick ’s work ? ”" "“ Why -- no , Mrs. Avery , ”" "“ Or -- I probably read it when I was a little girl . ”" "“ Eva has a way of saying to Nick ‘ When I work , I work ’ . ”" "“ Tony and I dropped in : we used to drop in on Nick when he lived at home . Eva did n’t come out of her study , just shrieked through the closed door that she ’d go crazy if Nick interrupted her . We heard it so plainly , you see , because she lifted her voice and -- and -- yelled . I tried to look as if nothing was happening , and Tony , too , tried to pass it off for Nick ’s sake . And then Nick opened her door and walked in . I whispered to Tony that we had better leave---- ”" "“ She is pretty , ”" "“ Then why did she marry him ? ”" "“ She is so fond of parties , ”" "“ I beg your pardon , Mrs. Avery , for repeating it -- but Mrs. Van Suydam said something else . She said that she had always fancied artists were weak creatures , and that she was now afraid that Nick was weaker than his new friends . This was what frightened her , I suspect . ”" "“ She said that in Eva ’s friends she seemed to have discovered a toughness of fibre , a tenacity of aim , and the will to succeed . This was what frightened her , I think , ”" "“ Nick ’s so fond of his mother . I heard him saying to Eva -- at that same tea---- ”" "“ Eva was lovely about it . She said to Nick ‘ But she ’s splendid ! She ’s splendid ! ’ ”" "“ How did you know ? ”" "“ Wo n’t you do something about it ? ”" "“ What is Eva doing ? ”"
Nicholas: "“ See ! ”" "“ Here is my mother ! ”" "“ Hello ! How did you get here ? ”" "“ Such a shame , for a brilliant novelist , as Eva is now acknowledged to be---- ”" "“ Remember when he said ‘ Suppose we go back to Eva ’s study ? She looks so sweet at her writing - table -- like a little girl playing ’ ? ”" "“ My man , if ever there was a time-- ”" "“ I do believe the silly man is jealous of Spencer Mapes ! ”" "“ When we come back , the lights in the windows will give us the silhouette . ”" "“ It ’s magnificent , ”" "“ There ’s nothing like it . ”" "“ Admire you ? Why -- never before in my life was there the absolute ! You ’ve the great gift of beauty , Eva . ”" "“ That is n’t worth a tinker ’s damn beside your lovely face . ”" "“ Is n’t Eva ’s idea of sentiment an oddity ? ”" "“ Where are we bound for ? I cling to my old - fashioned notion that I feel more comfortable if I know the name of my host or hostess . The other night -- don’t you remember?--Molly Underhill screamed at a young man with a powdered face who was running as fast as he could to the centre of the gathering ‘ Whose party is this ? ’ And the young man lisped ‘ I ’m thure I do n’t know . I was bwought here by thomeone . ’ ”" "“ Do you know , Eva , you can speak like a gangster -- out of the corner of a rigid mouth ! You have so many accomplishments . ”" "“ In another minute she will disappoint me . She has a way of throwing cold water in a fellow ’s face . ”" "“ I think your idea for a caricature of Eva Litchfield is good . But do explain it again ? ”" "“ We used to have storms like this when I was a boy . In those days , they used to last a long while ; but this one may be slush by morning . ”" "“ Wrong ! I care for you . But you ’re such a cold - blooded young fish---- ”" "“ She ’s prettier when she ’s tranquil ; is n’t she ? ”" "“ You ca n’t possibly be hungry ! We shall be nibbling at sandwiches all night ! ”" "“ I can tell you this , my girl , ”" "“ food is basically the most important thing , for on its supply and general excellence hinges what you have in mind . ”" "“ What have I in mind ? ”" "“ Work ! ”" "“ To that , I ’ll add love . And I should like to ask you how either work or love would go on , on a basis of artistic victuals ? ”" "“ Where now ? ”" "“ Why not ? ”" "“ So you ’re here again ? The bad penny . No : what I think you are is the dark angel . ”" "“ How many of us do you make it ? ”" "“ Strange ! ”" "“ Very strange ! In the taxi there were so many legs and arms that I feared we ’d brought along the entire party . ”" "“ You ’ve given me an idea , Dinah . Eva ca n’t help it . Therefore I am taking her home . ”" "“ She said that the little white keys were teeth to devour her -- little masculine teeth biting her heart . I say , Dinah ! What I said to her was ‘ Why masculine ? Feminine teeth can bite . ’ And , speaking of the summer -- have you any idea of what she is planning to do ? ”" "“ None . But surely she would tell you ? ”" "“ Do n’t permit me to go to parties ? ”" "“ There ’s nothing I ’d like better . I ’d like to think of you , all day , as safely at home waiting for my return . There ’s happiness for a man -- to know that the woman he loves is watching out the window for his return at night -- waiting for him , beautiful and sweet , at the end of his day in a man ’s rough world . Oh , Eva---- ! ”" "“ She says things , sometimes -- at home---- You see , if it were n’t for these things she says and then , evidently , tries to retract , I ’d be so much less crazy about her . Can you see how that could be ? She said , the other day , that something is happening to her , in her mind , so that at present she does n’t know much about herself . ”" "“ You look like a flower yourself . Your cheeks are red . If you knew how much good it does me , to see you look so healthy . ”" "“ But I must buy you something ? This beautiful day -- and you knocking a man ’s eye out with your charms -- I must buy you something . What shall it be ? There ’s a dog shop around on Park Avenue ; and on my way up to meet you I noticed a good little pup in the window - cage . He took my fancy . Sha n’t we go and buy him for you ? ”" "“ We are your staunch supporters , your ardent admirers , Eva . ”" "“ Look here , you are a changed woman the instant you ’re thrown with your friends . I never saw anything so peculiar . It ’s a fit that comes over you . The fit-- ”" "bitterly--“is on you now . ”" "“ But in talking , she ’d dissect the Almighty . ”" "“ The people in the room ? ”" "“ But there ’s talk anyway , is n’t there ? ”" "“ Then I feel sure you will stay . ”" "“ It seems , of late years , to inculcate a love of money . ”" "“ What ’s wrong ? ”" "“ I never saw you look this way---- ”" "“ Sweetheart ! ”" "“ Early to bed , for you . You are working yourself up . ”"
One: "“ But -- Dinah darling!--of course you realize that Eva would be immensely pleased , if she knew how much we talk about her . ”" "“ Add to that the one excruciating comment on us that Van Suydam has been known to make . He said -- according to Eva--‘Then it ’s a labour union , and I ’m a scab and liable to get hurt ? ’ Eva said she did n’t speak to him for the rest of the way to wherever they were going . Eva , poor devil , does n’t think it amusing that she tells us these things . ”"
Winnie: "“ It ’s on account of her marriage . ”" "“ She dresses for her own satisfaction ; she takes a narcissus - like joy in being a picture . ”" "“ I had n’t expected you to be the one to call her a narcissist . Well , anyway , the effect of her entrances is more shattering than ever now she has her husband at heel . And how on earth can we talk , when he ’s around ? I ’ll just tell you : you might as well see how things are going ; and one party that that man ’s presence spoils is like any other that he puts an end to . They do n’t live so far from us , and every now and then they drop in after dinner . There are people at our place , usually , as you may remember . Well , anyway , one evening Eva sailed in looking like a Botticelli virgin in cloth - of - gold . Only -- she was brittle . You know how she gets ? She gives the impression , when in that mood , of choosing her words with care -- as if they were going to the printer . Her husband followed her in ; and he was laughing . It ’s unusual , to catch Nicholas Van Suydam enjoying a good laugh when he ’s with any of us . He was n’t dressed , by the way ; said she ’d taken him by surprise with her ball costume . And , Dinah , does n’t that one thing show how little he knows her ? Anyway , she told me what he had said on the way to us . You know , of course , that if you get Eva at the right moment there ’s nothing she wo n’t tell ? He had reminded her that these studios used to be the stables belonging to his mother ’s neighbours . And she had said it had atmosphere . He had come back at her with the reminder that that stiff and starched old coachman of his mother ’s lives above his mother ’s stable , which , as it happens , is two doors from us in the Alley . And , she said , she stamped her foot at him and remarked that he could n’t make her lose her temper , because she simply adored his mother ’s old - fashioned ways . She said that the old lady is a real literary character . ‘ Good lord ! ’ he said , raising his eyes to heaven . Eva actually does admire that old woman . She said to him that his mother was a literary remains , that she had never seen anything like her , that she was an anachronism . She wound up by thanking her stars that she ’d found such a thing in New York , of all places . And that ’s when he again rolled his eyes and said ‘ Good lord ! She _ is _ New York ! ’ ”" "“ It seems that he made fun of our two names -- Addis ’ and mine -- over our front doorbell . It seems that it ’s a bone of contention between them that on her books Eva still uses her maiden name alone . ”" "“ And how can you take him , after all -- that husband of hers ? He ’s made no attempt to fit into the circle of Eva ’s friends . Eva told us that he said he believed marriage should be an abdication of this willingness to listen to the advice of friends . I do think , ”" "“ that smoking a pipe gives a man an advantage over us ; and they know it , the nasty things ! Nicholas Van Suydam stretched out his long legs and leaned back and clenched that pipe stem between his teeth and grinned at us ; and when I asked point - blank what was on his mind he mumbled around the filthy pipe that he ’d been saying to himself ‘ My man , if ever there was a time in your life when you had better sit tight , this is it ! ’ ”" "“ Oh well , ”" "“ I acknowledge that we were talking about Eva ’s affairs . ”" "“ Eva did n’t object , ”" "“ You know her . Spence came in about that time , and said -- you know , Spence , you can be counted on to say it!--that she was something - or - other - delicate and rare , and she positively purred . She was taken by the idea of having attributed to her an unapproachable perfection . ”" "“ Again we meet ! ”" "“ What with living expenses being beyond reason , where would we be without him to cash our checks which we ’ve no means of knowing to be good , to give us credit when checks are out of the question---- ”" "“ As I tried to tell you this afternoon -- only Florence talks so much---- ”" "“ Does anyone deny that she ’s outstripped all of you ? ”" "“ Notice a change in her ? ”" "“ Ah that ’s what we do n’t know , ”" "“ She ’s trying her best to make us believe that she is involved in some affair . And of course her telling it makes it sound as if it were not true , and we know her so well that we are sure she ’d tell it if it were true . ”" "“ You ’ll find we all do , ”" "“ Wait till you see , ”" "“ Oh , encroaching ! ”" "“ My good woman , you may be my hostess , but keep your hands off Mr. W. I wo n’t stand for personal liberties . Liberties with my spirit will go down all right ; but just you lay off Mr. W. ”" "“ Tell us more , ”" "“ How did you lose him ? ”" "“ Did Emma bite you ? ”" "“ Simply answer that . ”" "“ I feel immoral ! ”" "“ A chance at what ? ”" "“ Besides , you have a wife , ”" "“ With both of them , ”" "“ it ’s a case of suppressed sex . ”" "“ Underneath , if she ’d only acknowledge it , she ’s a human being like the rest of us . But she would die sooner than own up . With Molly , the surface is quite ordinary , while inside -- who knows ? Therefore , she gives out that she is having one affair after another . ”" "“ Molly ’s trying to live in a protracted emotional crisis . She gloried in the recent unpleasantness . Save your pity until she needs it . ”" "“ Why change the shape of the man , when the new spirit is bound to be a duplicate of the old ? ”" "“ I do n’t think , mind you , that any man is possible as a life companion ; but what ’s the sense in changing ? ”"
Addis Wickersham: "“ You know how Eva comes into a room -- gorgeously dressed when she knows it is n’t a formal party ? ”" "“ It no longer gives the impression of being the library of a scholar . ”" "“ What a ghastly sight -- a lot of women stuffing onions down their gullets ! ”" "“ Winfreda , my spouse , this is intolerable ! ”" "“ Your own larynx is a fine one , madame . I saw it distinctly . ”" "“ Have you eaten onions ? ”" "“ Has it never occurred to you , Eva , that you write not so much for the quality of literature as for the attention it wins for you ? ”" "“ Nonsense , ”" "“ She ’s strange because she gets away with it . ”" "“ And here am I , on my way to console my own wife , which you will admit is a novelty . ”" "“ A side show to the greater show of the party , ”" "“ You ladies are always upset , in this house ; because Daniel steals the spotlight . ”" "“ Do try to find out what ’s on Eva ’s mind ? ”"
The creature: "“ What business of yours is the growth of New York ? You ’re a small - sized widow - woman who had deliberately come back : now put up with it . ”"
A fat Italian: "“ Mrs. Avery ! And Miss Underhill ! But how sad it is to see you here without Miss Litchfield ! ”"
My: "“ My dear lady , ”" "“ My goodness ! How can you have the nerve to ask such a thing with a face all nasty and gory like that ? ”"
he: "“ Go on talking ? Do n’t stop ? ”" "“ That -- for -- your -- work ! ”"
Miss Augusta: "“ My dear Mrs. Avery , what do you think of Nicholas Van Suydam having married Eva Litchfield ? Do you believe that they have even a slim chance at happiness ? ”" "“ Sister Lois is so light - minded . ”" "“ My dear Mrs. Avery , ”" "“ we felt that it might be advisable to discuss what can be done about poor Nicholas and -- poor -- Eva . You young people are so apt to be heedless until the mischief is wrought . ”" "“ Young to me , ”" "“ Young to me . ”" "“ I refer , ”" "“ to the Pope at Rome . ”" "“ Shall we get down to the business that brought us together today ? ”" "“ Quite right , ”" "“ We will now come to the point . ”" "“ I should think , Sister Lois , that what concerns so intimate a friend as Lavinia Van Suydam concerns us in only a slightly less degree . ”" "“ She followed that up , if I remember rightly , by saying that she wanted no more condescension . Such ingratitude ! After all that Lavinia , and Lavinia ’s friends , have tried to do for her ! ”" "“ Nicholas has learned to curse ! ”" "“ Oh , yes , he has , Gussie ! The time we ran across them at the speakeasy Tilly took us to---- ”" "“ Sister Lois ! ”" "“ Enough ! I will not permit such language . ”" "“ Sister Lois , if you would make an effort to be less frivolous we might get at what I wished to see Mrs. Avery about . ”" "“ Do you know , Tilly , I do feel that all the friction started at Lavinia ’s dinner ? I know that ’s what Gussie is getting ready to talk about . But Gussie wo n’t believe that---- ”" "“ And how , pray , ”" "“ did we hurt her feelings ? I hold that she displayed a lamentable lack of the proper feeling . You ask what happened , Mrs. Avery ? I ’ll tell you . I aroused fury on her part by asking her to recite some of her work . ”" "“ She was merely awaiting an excuse to drag Nicholas out of the home of his ancestors . ”" "“ Mrs. Avery , do you see why Eva should have been affronted ? I ’ve always understood that authors like nothing better than to read their writings to their friends . ”" "“ I must tell you , Mrs. Avery , ”" "“ that Nicholas ’ wife will bring his mother ’s grey hair in sorrow to the grave . ”" "“ That amuses you ? But tell me this : could you yourself live amicably in the house with Eva Van Suydam ? ”" "“ When she left Lavinia ’s dinner - party , ”" "“ she was in a tantrum . She said ‘ I ’m a working woman , and must get home to my labours ’ . Poor Nicholas ! His face was a study . ”" "“ She was so artificial about it . Poor Nicholas said -- trying to put a good face on it -- that the making of books was a sealed book to him ; and she was kittenish and shook her finger at him . ‘ A pun ! For shame ! ’ It sounded most silly . ”" "“ My dear Mrs. Avery , you do n’t think that I should take up your time -- not to mention my own , which I assure you is filled with useful tasks -- with this trivial scene at Lavinia Van Suydam ’s ? No , indeed ! I really planned to request you to use your influence about the apportioning of the rooms in Nicholas ’ house . ”" "“ It was done by Eva , ”" "“ Of course you remember how the small houses on the side streets are arranged ? ”" "“ On each floor there is one sunny room and one in which the sun never shines . It is unhealthy to get no sunshine , ”" "“ Poor Nicholas will shoot up weedy and pale like a potato sprouting in a cellar . ”" "“ She did n’t explain a like apportioning of the bedrooms , ”" "“ Well ? ”" "“ What were you going to say , Sister Lois ? ”" "“ She leaves Nicholas in those dreadful northern rooms during the warm weather when the only breath of air comes through the southern windows . It ’s useless for him to assert -- he is so chivalrous , being Lavinia ’s son -- that he prefers the north light for his work . He works at his office . And if the house is so good to work in , why -- will you tell me -- does she take herself off to some cool spot every summer ? ”" "“ Well ! ”" "“ But not generous . ”" "“ It will be pinched when she is older , ”" "“ Poor Tilly is n’t what he was , ”" "“ Do eat this , Mrs. Avery . You ’re such a scrap of a person , I always think you must be dieting . ”" "“ Indeed ! ”" "“ And how , pray , did you come to know about it ? ”" "“ Please do n’t keep me waiting . ”" "“ Humph ! Indeed ! ”" "“ What can you mean , dear Mrs. Avery ? ”" "“ And why , pray , do you think such a thing ? ”" "“ is where you make your mistake , Lavinia . You hold off from directing these two young people . If you would listen to me---- ”" "“ How can Lavinia have a word to say about it , when it ’s a question of Nicholas ’ wife running away to get out of having a baby ? ”" "“ My dear girl , whenever we speak of you it is in your best interests , let me assure you . ”" "“ You can tell us anything . ”" "“ I am very fond of young people , ”" "“ and I do n’t at all mind giving much of my time to the solution of their problems . ”" "“ Well , there you are ! I was afraid you had gone home . ”" "“ How do you do ? ”" "“ You will permit me to intrude a little longer ? A gentleman is calling for me . ”" "“ My dear Mrs. Avery , do n’t go yet ? I came back in order to tell Lavinia a piece of news -- not that I fear it will affect her , for she is sound as the rock of Gibraltar . But , after all---- I daresay you do n’t , being an artist , keep up with the daily news ? Artists always have their heads in the clouds , do n’t they say ? I have heard that expression used in relation to them , at any rate . But are n’t you , my dear Mrs. Avery , worried ? ”" "“ I heard , today , from well authenticated sources which I ’m not at liberty to quote , that several New York banks are on the verge of their Waterloo , ”" "“ I do n’t know , my dear girl . But do find out from Nicholas if it ’s true -- I certainly was told it on good authority -- ahem!--Tony Bloodgood , to be exact , mentioned it to Gertrude -- that he has lost money ? ”" "“ What shall I do ? ”"
Mr. Tillinghast: "“ But surely you ca n’t be so gracious as to call us ‘ young people ’ ? ”" "“ Ho ! Ho ! ”" "“ Business ? With three fair ladies ? ”" "“ Ahem ! ”" "“ I do really suspect that all along Nicholas knew how to curse . ”" "“ He did n’t expect to see us in such a place . I refer to what is called a speakeasy . ”" "“ If you had asked her in another way ? ”" "“ I do n’t think he would like to be called a potato in a cellar , Gussie ; he ’s such a good looking man . Besides , when they were showing us the house he really did impress me as being awfully proud of it . And I did hear her say to you that it was lucky that when she wrote she wanted sunshine , and when he worked at home he needed a north light for his drawing - table . ”" "“ Dear me ! Dear me ! ”" "“ I should really dislike to think it . They ’re so well matched in the way of looks . I admire Eva ’s looks more than I can tell you . ”" "“ She has such a broad and gracious brow , and her eyebrows take a flying line . Her hair seems to fly upwards , too , although it really never blows about . Did you ever notice that about her , Augusta -- that she is never frowsy ? There ’s something about her , ”" "“ that is wing - like , aspiring . She’s -- she ’s aloof , untouchable , and reaching up . She seems to be looking at a facet of the star to which she ’s hitched her wagon ; and the star is eternally within and beyond her reach , poor girl ! ”" "“ Her mouth -- such a small mouth!--is fastidious . ”" "“ Have you ever noticed that she has the nicest little straight nose ? ”" "“ It must have been such a strange contrast , that between Lavinia and Eva , the day they met . Both such pale women . ”" "“ A little bird told me , ”" "“ Meaning Gertrude ? She had little to do , not to tell her own aunt ! ”" "“ No , ”" "“ Oh , no indeed : Lavinia told me . ”" "“ Lavinia went up there to fetch Nicholas home , ”" "“ Nicholas was very quiet , too , she told me , ”" "“ She looked back from the head of the stairs . She knew that already she was forgotten . She said that at this moment she tasted bitterness . ”" "“ Ladies understand each other , ”" "“ Did you ever think that houses may have souls -- souls as individual as our own immortal souls ? ”" "“ Do n’t you think the call of a house like this is a loud call ? I sometimes wonder if Nicholas hears it -- yet ? ”"
Miss Lois: "“ My goodness , Gussie , are you going to tack that on to the poor old gentleman ? ”" "“ I did n’t know there was another one , ”" "“ Gussie , you always do talk too much . ”" "“ I ca n’t forget , ”" "“ having heard Eva say to Nicholas that she needed to feel at home . She sounded forlorn : so there ! And I do n’t yet see , Mrs. Avery , why Eva should n’t feel at home with her husband ’s family and their friends . ”" "“ Well , anyway , ”" "“ Eva sailed in like a bird . She has a pretty chin ; it ’s always so high in air . Nicholas was too upset to notice that they were passing our table . And---- ”" "“ He was growling in his throat , ”" "“ And Eva ’s skirt went rather billowing down the room . Oh , dear ! I ’d so like to be young and slim and have my skirts billow ! People just have to look at Eva . ”" "“ Oh , of course ! ”" "“ That ’s what Nicholas did n’t like . I heard him distinctly , roaring -- although it was under his breath , it sounded for all the world like a roar--‘Damn her public ! ’ ”" "“ That Mr. Mapes -- such a friend of Eva ’s , is n’t he , Mrs. Avery?--tried to smooth Nicholas down . I heard him say ‘ You ’re so lucky that you do n’t have to advertise your work ; are n’t you ? You find it difficult to see why we pander to the buyers of our goods ? ’ So tactful of him , to try to smooth dear Nicholas down . Nicholas has his father ’s fiery temper . ”" "“ You got yourself in trouble , ”" "“ by trying to manage things . You always try to manage people , and they do n’t like it . You started in directly we had left the table , and drew up chairs and told Eva to stand on a certain spot ; it was exactly as if she had been hired to amuse the guests . I ’ve been sure , ever since , that it made trouble . ”" "“ Eva does know how to manage men ! And I do think---- ”" "“ I meant , Eva does know how to pull the wool over gentlemen ’s eyes ! ”"
They: "“ What ? ”" "“ But we thought you were against us in the matter ! ”" "“ That this could have happened to New York ! ”"
she: "“ Miss Dinah , please ma’am lemme speak to you jes ’ a minute ’ fore you goes ? ”"
The visiting Englishman: "“ Do you know how to live , you Americans ? ”" "“ Or do you live ? Did you see the flea circus ? ”"
Freye Remsen: "“ The way you said it---- ”" "“ Well , yes , ”" "“ But what does that signify ? ”"
The editor of “ Walhalla ”: "“ Walhalla ”"
Zermonte: "“ It sounds so foolish ; but I see her that way . I should do her with her neck elongated , and her mouth without human emotion , and her eye -- just one eye showing -- and looking , looking , so watchful for those who make a move towards her . I should take all humanity out of her . It would be the only way to do her -- you see ? ”" "“ I myself shall try Africa next , ”" "“ The only thing one can not find in New York is a Negro at home . ”"
his: "“ Sorry , lady . It acts up like this when it ’s cold weather . ”" "“ Get out and stick pins in people and watch them kick . Everyone kicks differently . It ’s very amusing . The pins , of course you understand , must be mental pricks . ”"
The desk clerk: "“ It cleared up for the New Year , did n’t it , Mrs. Avery ? ”"
Someone: "“ Buddy , how about speeding up the old bus ? ”" "“ This is a brothel . ”" "“ You do n’t object if I use that in my column , do you ? No one else has thought to say it . ”" "“ She ’s a bit old - fashioned in her style , but she can run for a while longer on her prestige , of course . The old war horses ca n’t be killed off , worse luck . ”" "“ She ’s off somewhere trying to get herself ruined . ”"
me: "“ Are you guying me ? ”"
you: "“ Aw , shucks ! ”"
driver: "“ Never take your hand off that horn ? ”" "“ It enables you to stand out from the mob . You want to stand out from the mob , do n’t you ? Of course you do . It ’s the ambition of every intelligent being . ”"
the thug - like driver: "“ Aw ! ”" "“ Ca n’t a feller enjoy hisself when he gets the chanst ? ”"
Henry Pepperel: "“ You ’re an observer , too , are n’t you ? Do you fancy Miss Quincy is leaving me here , impaled , you might say , because I once interviewed her ? ”" "“ Oh , but you , Miss Litchfield -- you can accomplish the impossible , naturally . You are one for whom crowds make way . ”" "“ Is n’t it imbecilic , ”" "“ that they do n’t want to be interviewed unless it ’s a grossly flattering spiel you turn out ? And yet , they die like flies if you do n’t beg them for interviews . ”"
Yancey: "“ What a night ! Dinah , our place is all but demolished ! ”"
that competent maid: "“ Miss Eva ’s got some friends what ’s got looks like pizen . Yes ma’am , like pizen . But do dat stop Miss Eva from listenin ’ to ’em ? No ma’am , it do n’t . Lordy , Miss Dinah , she ai n’t got nothin’ but fancy sense . But she got a good heart . She ’s jes ’ like a little chile with a good heart , an ’ belief . ”"
His: "“ We ’re not going to quarrel , you know . ”" "“ And you ? ”" "“ Rhapsody in Blue ”"
the star: "“ Onions , ”" "“ are good for the larynx . ”"
The singer: "“ There ’s Florence Quincy , thinking of herself as a blonde planet and waiting for adulation . Go and catch an orbit around the planet and make her happy . ”"
a policeman: "“ Anything wrong , lady ? ”"
The maid: "“ There ai n’t anybody by that name lives here . ”"
man: "“ You , too , searching for the unattainable ? ”"
Pentreath: "“ Hey ! ”" "“ You gal ! Keep your head still ! ”" "“ Heugh ! Hard as nails -- mean as the devil -- vain as peacocks : all women ! Ornamental , though -- silly creatures ! Strut like peacocks . Prancing -- proud of their tail feathers . Ai n’t natural : ought to leave tail feathers to the males , like the birds . ”" "“ Pretty things -- glaciers , ”" "“ cool , and quiet -- full of clear colour -- know where they ’re goin’ and get there ! ”" "“ Heugh ! ”" "“ Jonathan ! Oh , Jonathan ! Do please come and hold my hand while they wash my head ? ”" "“ Well ? Ai n’t that what we ’ll all come to ? Ai n’t we all mad as coots ? ”"
A gorgeous youth: "“ Florence dear -- do you mind?--I’m afraid that this time Barney will truly do something desperate . ”"
my: "“ Jonathan ? ”" "“ Do please come with me while they wash my head ? Please , Jonathan ? ”"
Architects: "“ Stopped . ”"
Mattie: "“ I ’ll jes ’ open this winder a little ways so ’s you wo n’t be kilt by that stink , Miss Dinah , ”" "“ on the air . ”" "“ Yes’m ? ”"
The candidates: "“ Do listen ? Behind the pane of glass we were like fish in an aquarium . You know how fish goggle out at humanity filing past their tank ? We goggled . ”"
Eva ’s agent ’s secretary: "“ Is this Miss Litchfield ’s husband ? ”"
Edgar: "“ Did n’t you want to see me about something ? ”"
the young woman: "“ If you will let me explain---- ”"
Project Gutenberg: "“ Project Gutenberg ”" "“ Project Gutenberg ”" "“ Project Gutenberg ”" "“ Project Gutenberg ”" "“ Plain Vanilla ASCII ”" "“ Defects , ”"
PGLAF: "“ the Foundation ”"
You: "“ Project Gutenberg ”" "“ Plain Vanilla ASCII ”" "“ Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation . ”" "“ Right of Replacement or Refund ”"
